---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 1999-12-13
tag: writings
title: Charity begins at home, morally speaking
---
Protecting our loved ones is only natural in a world of un-met misery.

TALK of human failings has been rife in The Age these past few weeks.
First Peter Singer castigated us for spending spare dollars on luxuries
rather than the needs of the world’s poor. Then Pamela Bone contrasted
our ridiculous sentimentality for euthanased animals with our supposed
indifference to starving children.

Singer has spent much of his professional life trying to convince us the
compassion we feel for those we love is a moral failing. Such feelings
cloud our judgment and get in the way of a dispassionate assessment of
the more deserving object of our ethical attention. Should his mother
and a scientist known to be on the cusp of a cure for cancer both fall
off a boat, with the time to save only one, Singer has argued he would
and should save the scientist.

When the New Yorker revealed that Singer spends his own money on private
nursing care for his Alzheimer’s-affected mother rather than on feeding
the world’s poor, many believed Singer a hypocrite.

The truth is far worse. Paying for the private nursing is not Singer’s
way of acknowledging he has been mistaken all these years about the
value of the love, fidelity, gratitude and reciprocity that go into the
partial attachment he has to his mother. Rather, Singer’s spending
patterns simply reveal him to have an embarrassing weakness of will; an
inability to live up to the standards he believes right. It is different
when it’s your mother, he said sheepishly.

The compassion we feel for those we love and to whom we are responsible
is not a moral failing. The whole concept of intimate and enduring
relationships becomes a nonsense if we are unable to love or be
committed to certain people, and act on those commitments.

What would we feel about the person who didn’t instinctively move
towards their drowning mother? Or the parent who walks out the door with
a cheery \`\`Sorry dear, can’t go to your school play, got to feed the
starving children in Africa’’?

I also don’t believe the strong reader response to The Age’s report on
culling at Melbourne’s zoos means these readers lack the right amount of
compassion for starving children. Not only do we want, and need, to
focus most of our compassion on those for whom we care and feel
responsible, we also, like Singer, want to act on such feelings. We feel
compassion for the animals in the zoos. But, more importantly, we feel
we understand the problem (a zoo policy that allows healthy animals to
be put down) and believe we have the power to change it.

World hunger is a different kettle of fish. I feel confident most people
feel as much compassion - if not more - for starving humanity as they do
for the meerkats. However, I suspect many are far less confident about
the cause of the problem, and what they can do to help.

Back in the 1970s, I gave my weekly allowance to an organisation
collecting for the starving people of Ethiopia. The television
voice-overs sourced the tragedy to the ravages of drought. I still
remember the shock of discovering - years later - that the real source
of food shortages in that part of the world is civil unrest.

Of course, starvation is starvation, whatever the cause, and it is
highly improbable those doing the starving had any say in how the good
people collecting aid moneys made their case. But the point is that when
we give money, we trust that the agency taking our funds actually
understands the problem, and is giving it to us straight. Discovering
this is not the case may leave us feeling used and deceived.

This sense of disempowerment is exacerbated by the relentlessness of the
world’s problems. If the policy is changed at the zoos, there will be a
satisfying sense of closure. (There! That’s fixed and I helped.) There
will also, in all likelihood, be a long break before there is a need to
feel for and act on behalf of those animals again.

In contrast, the never-ending stream of misery pouring from our radios
and televisions offers neither closure nor respite from the insistent
feeling - engendered by our compassion - that we are obligated to help.
When will it all end, we wonder. Nothing ever changes, we wail. Like the
dogs in the learned helplessness experiments, many of us resign
ourselves to the daily onslaught of un-met human misery, convinced
there’s no point in trying to make things different, and no longer
willing to try.

I am not excusing our reluctance or refusal to do what we can for
unknown others in need. Most of us can and should do more. Indeed, I
like Singer’s suggestion that we donate 10percent of our earnings to
charity. But we betray a fundamental misunderstanding of the feelings
and behavior necessary to maintain meaningful human relationships -
families, friendships, communities - when we dismiss as moral weakness
our honoring of the impulse to put the needs of our own children,
parents and friends first.

In the same way, it is far too glib to propose a compassion deficit as
the reason relatively little fuss is made when images of starvation in
far-away lands hit the front page. It is far more likely our silence is
the outcome of our inability to understand the nature of the problem,
and our helpless belief that nothing we do will make a damn bit of
difference.