---
assets: ~
published: 1999-09-09
tags: ~
title: Australians Battle Over Definition of Fatherhood
---
Court and legislative battles have embroiled this nation in an uneasy
search for the definitive answer to the vexing question: Who are dads
anyway? The deliverers of DNA or the conveyers of care and concern? And
if the answer is the latter, can the law insist each child have one?

The Women’s Electoral Lobby here recently made history when it became
the first women’s organization ever to be granted leave by the nation’s
High Court (the Australian equivalent of the U.S. Supreme Court) to
intervene on behalf of women. The group will be arguing against no less
an adversary than the Catholic Church in a case that will decide whether
the nation’s single women will have the option of becoming mothers
through modern technology.

The case is set to continue on Friday, with the Judge insisting it be
resolved no later than September 2001.

The Victorian federal court had previously ruled in what is called the
McBain decision that the state’s denial of fertility treatments, such as
in vitro fertilization and donor sperm, to single women on the grounds
of their martial status violated Australia’s own Sex Discrimination Act,
as well as international agreements to which Australia is a signatory.

The Catholic Church is arguing the decision should be overturned and the
women’s lobby is urging the court to uphold the state’s ruling.

Law May Pass in Parliament to Overrule High Court

Hot on the heels of the state court’s McBain ruling, the lower house of
the Australian parliament passed a bill attempting to undo it by
authorizing the Australian states to discriminate against single women
by denying them access to donor sperm.

While two of the country’s three major parties, Labor and the Democrats,
oppose the bill, the decision by two Labor senators to abstain means it
may still become law. The Liberal government continues to support it on
the grounds that children have a right to a “mother and a father by
being conceived into a marriage or de facto relationship involving a man
and a woman.”

But are the Catholic bishops and the Australian government really
worried about the rights of children, or those of fathers?

It may surprise people to know that the law has long held marriage to be
the true test of fatherhood. Paternal rights are accorded to the
mother’s husband, regardless of whether her child is his biological
progeny, although society has long attempted to ensure the legal father
is also the biological father by socially and legally discriminating
against “illegitimate” children and “unmarried” mothers.

In the last few decades, declining rates of marriage and rising numbers
of divorces and extramarital births have exerted pressure on
marriage-based definitions of fatherhood. This is evidenced by the
increasing willingness of governments to use DNA tests to establish a
man’s biological paternity and then use this fact to compel him to
financially support “his” children.

In 1970s, Laws Said Mother’s Husband Was Father—Regardless

However, when widespread use of donor insemination began in the 1970s,
both federal and state governments in Australia and in other nations
moved quickly to pass legislation that ensured the mother’s
husband~~~~not the sperm donor~~~~was the legal father of the children.
Nevertheless, while governments allowed married and later de facto
couples to use donor sperm to form families, they repeatedly denied
lesbians and single women similar access.

The reasons are not hard to fathom. According to marriage-based
definitions of fatherhood, children born from donor sperm to single
women and lesbians are legally fatherless. And while the current
Australian government has no qualms about men being viewed as optional
when it comes to raising children~~~~its press releases repeatedly
praise the “excellent” job done by sole parents~~~~its anxieties about
legally excluding men from the process of forming families are palpable.

How do men want fatherhood defined? Some men seem eager to endorse
biological definitions of paternity. A U.S. man is currently fighting in
the courts for relief from child support payments to children he
recently discovered are not his biological progeny, although he has been
their social father from birth and continued to fill this role after his
marriage broke up.

One explanation for declining numbers of men willing to donate sperm is
the possibility that younger men believe that siring a child makes a man
a father, regardless of his relationship to the child’s mother.

But what about the children men help conceive, children they don’t even
know about? Or the fact that, without testing, men cannot be sure the
children they love and raise are biologically “theirs”? The fact that
biological and social fatherhood can be separated means biological
paternity, on its own, will continue to be an inadequate base on which
to ground men’s rights to and responsibilities for children and their
role in the family.

Efforts to Assert Primacy of Marriage Likely to Fail

Returning to marriage-based definitions of paternity is similarly
pointless. The pathetic attempts by the Australian government and
“fatherhood” advocates in the United States to reassert the primacy of
institutions like marriage~~~~and with them marriage-based definitions
of fatherhood~~~~are doomed to failure. The economic factors that have
historically forced women to become and remain married cannot~~~~and
should not~~~~be reinstated in the 21st century.

The assumption made by those trying to drag us backward are that men are
willing and eager to marry, have children and be responsible husbands
and fathers, but women are rejecting men in droves in their eagerness to
remain single and mother alone.

Fish may not need bicycles, but anyone who thinks most women don’t want
to live and raise children with men is sorely mistaken. The Women’s
Health Study of 39,000 Australian women shows a staggering 96 percent of
young women aspire to be in a de facto or married partnership, and 92
percent want to be mothers by the time they are 35.

This suggests that for the vast majority of single women, to have a
child using donor sperm is a decision of last resort. As one 37-year-old
woman in a recent study put it: “Of course, the idea would have been to
have met the man of my dreams and fallen in love and have it all happen
the usual way. … When I was on the (donor insemination) program (I
thought), ‘What a shame I’m having to do it this way.’ But it’s the only
avenue I have to have a child at this point in time.”

The genie of fatherhood let loose by declining rates of marriage, rising
numbers of divorces, extramarital births and the radical potential of
donor insemination won’t go back into the bottle. We need to search for
new, flexible definitions of fatherhood suited to the future, not the
past. The best place to start is by asking questions about what men and
women want~~~~from one another and when it comes to children~~~~and why
they are having so much trouble finding it together.

[Australian Catholic Bishops Conference]()
[http://www.catholic.org.au/statements/medicalethics.htm\#ASSISTED](http://www.catholic.org.au/statements/medicalethics.htm#ASSISTED)