---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 1999-06-11
tag: writings
title: Women are being ripped off, but not by feminism
---
Don’t blame the movement, blame the system.

SIAN Prior (on this page last month) gave us an insight into the
stresses successful young women experience in attempting to fit
motherhood into their high-powered lives. Prior protested against
repeated attempts by Cathy Sherry on this page to blame feminism and
feminists, rather than Australian workplace attitudes and practices, for
women’s inability to \`\`have it all’’ before their biological clocks
strike midnight.

Sherry is not alone in her desire to sheet home responsibility to
\`\`feminism’’ for women’s distress about the
work/relationship/motherhood conflict. American feminists Sylvia Hewlett
and Rene Denfield are just two of the women who contend that feminism
has failed to set priorities for the needs of the vast majority of its
constituency: educated middle-class women who assume they’ll work and
plan to mother. The critics contend that feminism taught young women
they’d have it all, but then got derailed into male-hating, goddess
worship and anti-porn crusades. These distractions have led to young
women’s disaffection from the movement, and the movement’s failure to
procure the social policies necessary for women to pursue their
feminist-inspired dreams.

While Beatrice Faust contends that such problems, and the related
disaffection of young women, are exclusive to the United States, young
Australian women beg to differ. Deakin University’s Fiona Stewart found
gen-X women exhausted by the clash between their expectations for their
lives, and antagonistic social forces. They speak of glass ceilings and
a pervasive sense of feeling \`\`ripped off’’ by a feminism that falsely
suggested the world was their oyster. Such feelings contrast sharply
with the high approval ratings that baby boomers give the women’s
movement. These women express gratitude to feminism for having increased
their self-regard, their independence and their opportunities for work
and education.

Who is right? Is it ridiculous, as some movement defenders claim, to
blame a protest movement like feminism for the conditions it seeks to
change? To claim that women’s resentment of, or lack of interest in, the
feminist movement is simply the result (to quote Denfield) of tuning in
to \`\`Channel Backlash‘’? Or is the feminist claim that it should be
exempt from such criticism because of its outsider status disingenuous?
Is it unjustified, as media commentator Catharine Lumby suggests, for
feminists to claim they are outside \`\`the power loop’’, given the
inroads the movement has made into government institutions, public
policy and popular debate?

Certainly it is misguided for the old order to reply to younger women’s
feelings of being ripped off by feminism with backlash-type arguments.
Feelings are feelings, resistant by nature to logical counters. If
younger women feel angry or indifferent about feminism’s past promises
or current direction, then that is a problem for the long-term viability
of the movement. Consequently, those feelings must be taken seriously
and addressed, pronto.

While taking younger women’s views seriously does not mean treating
everything we say as gospel, it does mean an end to explaining away our
concerns by using ideas such as \`\`false consciousness‘’ and
\`\`patriarchal brainwashing’’. Such explanations imply we lack
maturity, media savvy and moral agency, and thoroughly piss us off. In
fact, objections to the old order’s assumptions about women’s lack of
moral agency - not its social, rather than individualistic, explanations
of female oppression - are behind the derogatory tagging of the old
order as \`\`victim’’ feminists.

When younger women say that the most important goal of the feminist
movement is to help women balance work and family, the old order must
listen. But who’s to say it isn’t or hasn’t?

However much political, personal and media power and influence the
feminist movement has, few believe we live in a feminist world: a world
designed around and catering to women’s needs and priorities. In
addition to undermining the basic work protections upon which women
rely, the Howard Government has had little time for the grass-roots
feminist movement or institutional feminist power bases, many of which
have been dismantled since the Liberals came to power. This means that
even if resolving the work/motherhood conflict had been the number one
priority of the old order, working mothers are unlikely to have been
much better off than they are today.

While there are legitimate points of difference between older and
younger feminists, it is the Government and the workplace that have
really betrayed working mothers and those aspiring to motherhood. And
while new-order feminists may be right to grouse about the priority
grass-roots feminist organisations and femocrats have given to the
work/family conflict, perhaps younger women have also let down the
women’s movement. Grass-roots feminist organisations struggle to recruit
younger members, perhaps because of their failure to set priorities for
issues that concern younger women, but also because many are busy with
their families, or too busy \`\`doing it themselves’’.

It is more than understandable that younger women are angry. We want the
struggle for our rights, and the things we need to access them, to be
over. And we thought it was. But we must ensure that we direct our anger
appropriately. Directing it to reshape grass-roots and institutional
feminist priorities to suit our goals is appropriate, but pretending
that feminist social analysis, or a movement for and about women is no
longer relevant to younger women’s realities, is not.

We are right to feel ripped off, but mistaken to continue that long
female tradition of turning our anger in on ourselves. We’ve got much
bigger fish to fry.