---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 1999-07-22
title: Why women need a workplace revolution
---
Reproductive technology will never provide the answer to inequality.

QUESTION: What do frozen eggs and ovaries, donor eggs, and hormone
replacement therapy have in common?

Answer: They have all helped women overcome age-related infertility or
“beat” their biological clocks - or may be used to do so in the future.

Julian Savulescu, the director of the Murdoch Institute’s ethics unit,
contends that despite the risks to women of the drugs used in many
infertility treatments, fertile women have a right of access to
reproductive advances such as egg freezing. In giving women the same
choices as men - to be educated, to work and to have children at the
time of their choosing - Savulescu argues that egg freezing is
potentially the most liberating reproductive advance since the
introduction of the contraceptive pill.

Jennifer Parks, in the prestigious feminist journal Hypatia, contends
that infertility treatments that enable older and even post-menopausal
women to have children may be the only way for women to overcome the
social inequities that force women - but not men - to “choose” between
career and motherhood.

In Victoria, only infertile couples are allowed access to infertility
treatments such as IVF. However, the use by fertile women of less
ethically contentious procedures such as egg and ovary freezing, is not
technically prohibited. More importantly, both Melbourne IVF and the
Reproductive Biology Unit at the Royal Women’s are willing to speak to
any woman who wishes to bank her eggs for future use.

Monash IVF’s medical director, Gab Kovacs, has no personal objections to
fertile women having access to such technologies to preserve their
fertility - as long as they are aware of the experimental nature of the
technology, and the associated health risks.

Both Monash and Melbourne IVF assist women approaching or beyond
menopause to become mothers using donor eggs and HRT. Melbourne IVF
routinely treats women up to the age of 48, while Monash is unconcerned
about age until a woman turns 45.

But while Melbourne IVF’s clinical chairman, John McBain, seeks to
discourage women suffering empty-nest syndrome from using the technology
in the hope of having another baby, he is sympathetic to women whose
efforts to maintain or advance in their job prohibited them from
partnering and/or procreating in their more fertile years. And McBain
isn’t alone in his sympathetic desire to help post-menopausal women
attain motherhood. Last year, Adelaide’s Queen Elizabeth Hospital helped
a 53-year-old woman give birth to triplets.

It is not hard to see why some ethicists, infertility treatment experts
and women see infertility treatment as their best hope of obtaining the
same educational, employment and parenting opportunities as have long
been enjoyed by men. To access them, a woman doesn’t need to change the
world, she just needs money. For some women, such treatments may be seen
as a way to quietly bypass a system that forces them to confront their
most demanding career hurdles at the same times as they confront their
reproductive shelf-life.

But, unfortunately, there are a number of problems with such individual
attempts to beat the system. The most important one, according to McBain
and Kovacs, is the experimental nature of interventions such as egg and
ovary freezing. Egg freezing has an extremely low success rate. McBain
worries that women will squander their natural fertility because media
reports about new reproductive technologies give them a false sense of
security about their prospects of using such technology to achieve a
mature-age pregnancy in the future.

In addition, infertility treatment is time-consuming, expensive and
invasive - and so may pose risks to women’s health. While a large
longitudinal study conducted by the Centre for the Study of Mothers’ and
Children’s Health at La Trobe University suggests there is no higher
incidence of cancer among women in the short and medium term, we cannot
yet know whether such promising findings will continue indefinitely.

Fertility experts agree that the best strategy for women who want
children is to attempt pregnancy before or around the age of 30. As a
society, we can approach such well-meaning advice in two ways: we can
ignore it, and enable women with the financial means to attempt their
own private solutions to age-related childlessness by using these
treatments; or we can restructure the way that we work.

As numerous recent studies of the Australian workplace have concluded,
corporate values continue to suppose that employees are free from family
and other non-workplace commitments.

Moreover, education patterns ensure that both women and men are in their
peak childbearing years at precisely the same time as they are under
most pressure to prove themselves and to advance at work.

Changes to the way we work and the creation of pro-family social
policies that support all families with children (not just those in
which the woman doesn’t work) are two critical steps to ensuring women
are truly free to choose when and whether they will have children.