---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 1999-11-29
tags: ~
title: "The anti-choicersâ\x80\x99 real target is women"
---
Late abortions are emotive fodder for those who deny women moral agency.

ABORTION is in the news again, and once more the terms of the debate are
heavily weighted against women. As usual, the anti-choice movement is
trying to stir up anxiety about second-trimester abortions as a means of
depicting women as unethical foetal containers.

Those immersed in the abortion debate have long recognised that
undermining women’s moral agency, not upholding the rights of the
foetus, is the centrepiece of anti-choice strategy. Examples abound, but
the most obvious is the anti-choice attitude to abortion choices in the
hard cases: when the pregnancy is life-endangering or the result of rape
or incest. If the anti-choice movement really opposed abortion because
it denies the foetus its right to life, then they would oppose all
abortions - hard case or not - with equal determination. After all, how
the foetus is conceived has no bearing on its \`\`right to life’’.

However, polls show that few anti-choicers outside the Pope’s intimate
circle believe a women ought to be forced to sacrifice her life to bring
her embryo to term, or to bring to term an embryo conceived through rape
or incest.

What the hard cases demonstrate is that what really lies behind
anti-choice sentiment are mistaken views about the motives, intentions
and feelings of women who choose abortion. Anti-choice rhetoric abounds
with caricatures of women who seek abortions: women who abort because of
their careers or their desires to go on ski trips or get into bikinis.
The aim of the anti-choice movement is to convince the public to see
abortion as proof that too many women hold all the wrong values about
motherhood, womanhood and material possessions. That women who choose
abortion are, to use Fred Nile’s shorthand, snarling hard-faced
pro-abortion feminists.

The fretting of anti-choicers about late-term abortions is part of this
strategy. So while anti-choice concern appears to be about the
almost-viable foetus, the strategy is really designed to demonstrate the
incapacity of women to act as moral agents. What kind of a woman, they
ask, could care so little for her baby that she would choose to delay
having a termination for so long?

The female, rather than foetal, target of anti-choice rhetoric is summed
up well by anti-choice campaigner Margaret Tighe’s wonderment about why
a woman seeking a second-trimester abortion doesn’t just \`\`go on and
allow [her] baby to be born - I’m sure the Mafia would be happy to kill
it for a much cheaper rate’’.

The irony is that women’s intense concern for the wellbeing of their
foetus and others whom they love and to whom they feel responsible is
behind most decisions about unplanned pregnancies. Far from seeing
herself as locked in an evolutionary and political conflict of interests
with her foetus, the woman sees herself as responsible for her foetus:
its protector, and the only person who can make the best and most caring
decision about its fate.

A woman doesn’t see her abortion decision as ethically justified because
her rights override those of her foetus. She deems it ethical only if
she has made a careful, responsible decision to forgo motherhood because
she does not believe herself capable of parenting in the way she feels
is right. Many of the women in my study, for example, felt strongly that
before they had children, they should be financial, have a partner and
be ready to take on the responsibilities of parenthood.

Just 5per cent of abortions in Australia take place after 12 weeks’
gestation. Half of these are done after 16 weeks, the vast majority for
grief-stricken women with tragic amnio or scan results.

If the anti-choice movement were really interested in reducing
second-trimester rates, they would lobby to remove legislative
impediments to Australian women accessing RU486. Ten years’ experience
in France has shown that when women gain access to the abortion pill,
the overall number of abortions remains steady, but more are had earlier
in pregnancy.

The anti-choice movement could also put its considerable funds into
unearthing and providing all women with access to foetal diagnostic
tools that are safe to use earlier in pregnancy, allowing women who
terminate because of a heartbreaking diagnosis to do so sooner.

And the movement could lobby for policies that would limit the abuse and
ignorance that lead women to delay. An English study recently concluded
that nearly all women seeking second-trimester terminations have severe
social and psychological problems. Like the 12-year-old girl found to be
26-weeks pregnant by her teacher. Her father in prison, her mother
preoccupied with other children (she thought the girl’s weight gain was
puppy fat), the girl said she had been raped in the lift of her block of
flats. It turned out the alleged rapist was sexually involved with the
mother.

But, of course, the anti-choice movement has no intention of doing any
of these things - because concern about the viability or rights of the
foetus is not really the cause of their anxiety about second-trimester
abortions. Second-trimester abortions are simply the emotive fodder used
to gain public support for the goal of prohibiting all women from
accessing safe and legal abortions at any point.

Behind calls for prohibition is the belief that women so lack moral
agency that the state would be justified in stripping them of their
reproductive rights, thereby forcing all who conceive to mother.