---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 1999-09-12
tag: writings
title: Will making women equal change anything?
---
The issue: Will making women equal change anything?

YES - Frank Donovan, Clinical Social Worker

NO - Leslie Cannold, Feminist Academic

Dear Leslie

Our aggressive, competitive marketplace is a reflection of men’s power
and control, according to the women who want to break it down. How
serious are they when, far from challenging the system, women are
clambering to join it in their droves? And what will leading women do
about opportunity advertising and sex-role stereotyping?

Toyworld’s brochure arrived in the junk mail yesterday: the boys wentto
war with lasers, power figures,attack cycles, mutant marauders and
muscle-bound soldiers complete with armor and weaponry. The girls were
all prams, babies in bassinets, shopping trollies, dolls and a fantastic
combination oven/cook-top/kitchen assembly complete with smiling girl
cook.

Given the slaughter in East Timor, the brochure’s gender division of
military versus mothering was poorly timed, or was it? The marketing
gurus say that opportunity advertising and sex-role stereotyping
actually work. Most television advertising and programming confirm it.

Yes, the male aggressive marketplace of dog-eat-dog thrives in business
as in politics and sport; supported by more women than ever.

So, is it men’s aggression that has to change or just men?

Or should we just keep developing technology that does men out of jobs
and gets women into them?

Confused, Frank

Dear Frank

There’s no doubt women are eager to participate in the public world of
work. They need financial independence and want their share of public
power.

Globalisation creates the insecurity that fuels productivity and demand.
Will I land a job? Will I be able to do all I must to keep it and still
find time to marry and have a family? These are the questions that
preoccupy so many young people, male and female.

Perhaps it seems disingenuous for author Susan Faludi to call off the
gender wars when men started fighting back. The fuel for change is
palpable male distress and younger people’s search for non-gendered
analysis and solutions.

Male aggression is real, and it is not acceptable. It does and should
matter that women are heavily outnumbered in Australia’s boardrooms and
parliaments. But acknowledging how the world has come to feel so
oppressive to all of us is going to require a more sophisticated
understanding of power and oppression than \`\`Women have it bad, so men
as a gender must be responsible and have it better’’.

Leslie

Dear Leslie

So, if \`\`the fuel for change is (partly) palpable male distress‘’,
does that mean there might be gain from men’s pain? Well, that might
make it all worthwhile after all. And if \`\`younger people’s search
fornon-gendered analysis and solutions’’ means understanding how we got
into this mess, and some non-aggressive ways out of it, a lot of us men
might just be in that.

I especially like the bit about how we all need a more sophisticated
understanding of power relations than the old \`\`Women have it bad, so
men must have it better’’ argument. That will go down with some guys who
aren’t feeling too flush about things. As for the gender wars, I think
some of us men might still be struggling with the realisation that our
old weapons (power, influence, money and control) might be emotional
boomerangs. To put that another way, how much pain are we willing to
endure to maintain our fragile hold on power?

My original question still stands, though: \`\`When there are equal
numbers in the boardrooms, will women do it differently or will
oppression and aggression still feel the same?’’

Encouraged, Frank

Dear Frank

That is a hard question. Joan (Kirner) and Moira (Rayner) think so, but
there really is no hard evidence. So far, it looks as if putting a few
or some women into the power hierarchy as it stands doesn’t change
things.

I suspect that power corrupts and absolute power corrupts absolutely -
no exceptions made. Some studies suggest \`\`female’’ characteristics
like intuition, good listening skills and non-aggression can be found
among all oppressed minorities; essential skills for managing those in
power.

Women’s long association with raising children may also explain their
nurturing skills. But, as men increase their active participation in
fathering their children, men’s skills in these areas will also
increase.The values inherent in raising children - selflessness,
sacrifice, interdependence - stand in stark contrast to those of the
competitive market.

The inculcation of these values in both men and women is an important
step in preparing men and women to face the real challenge of the next
century: the destruction of individualist \`\`economically rationalist’’
values, policies and practices.

Here’s my question: do men do, should men do, fatherhood differently to
the way women do motherhood?

Leslie

Dear Leslie

Yes, I think so. Men have to model different ways of being. Men have to
model ways of being whole (emotionally and rationally) that many of us
still have not come to terms with yet - especially when it comes to our
sons.

I have never met Joan, though Moira might remember me from WA. But I
have seen those characteristics of intuition, good listening skills and
non-aggression among Aboriginal men and women in the north-west and
Central Desert regions. Seemed to work for them, sort of … eventually.

And, in the light of your reminder about inherent child-raising values,
I guess that takes us to the heart of the challenge. On Friday, I heard
Sister Anne Forbes interviewed on ABC’s 7.30 Report after her evacuation
from Dili. She said: \`\`I just pray we can learn to rule the world with
our hearts instead of our heads.’’ By the time Sunday Age readers see
our debate, the people she spent the last days with may well be dead.

I guess our challenge is how to reconnect \`\`the heart’’ with the head
on equal terms. Could men and women join forces, maybe?

Cautiously, Frank

Dear Frank

I’m still not sure what different ways of being you would like to see
men model for their sons, although my own two boys leave me in no doubt
that it is to their fathers that boys look for a role model. Are you
saying that women are naturally society’s \`\`hearts‘’ and men its
\`\`heads’’? In Victoria, middle-aged women are less supportive of the
Premier, Jeff Kennett, than middle-aged men, but I don’t think
femaleness accounts for this. Rather, it is that mothers are usually
more involved in their children’s lives than fathers, and so notice and
care more when hospitals and schools deteriorate.

I agree that society needs to cultivate and value virtues associated
with women such as nurture and compassion. But these value aren’t really
female any more than their opposites are intrinsically male. We value
what we know, and what we know comes from our experience. As men and
women have more of the same experiences in the paid workforce and at
home, they will come to know and value more of the same things.

These shared experiences, knowledges and values are the basis of the
joint assault force you propose. To achieve it, we must continue to work
towards a society in which women and men work as equals and in equal
proportions outside and inside the home. Equality is the basis of the
human liberation both men and women seek, and from which both men and
women will benefit. Ironically, it is only when women and men achieve
social equality that we will finally know whether and what sorts of
natural differences exist between the sexes.

Anger specialist, Vietnam veteran and former \`\`rebel’’ Labor MP Frank
Donovan has been around anger and violence most of his life. His book,
Dealing with Anger: Self-help solutions for men (Finch Publishing), was
released last month and is in bookshops at $19.95.