---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 1999-03-09
tags: ~
title: A role model? No thanks
---
First Diana, now Monica. They became superstars, but that doesn’t make
them admirable.

THE canonisation of Saint Monica has begun. Before our very eyes the
media is transforming Lewinsky from a dumb-assed slut to an admirable
young woman. She’s tamed her white-trash haircut and thrown away her
baseball cap. She’s donned cheekbones and a dignified navy suit. She’s
learnt her lesson. She’s showed him! Why, she’s turned out to be quite a
remarkable young lady.

I don’t wish to be mean when it comes to Lewinsky. There’s no doubt
she’s been through a lot. I mean, I would rather die than have the
idiotic things I said and did in my early 20s - sexual and otherwise -
broadcast to TV audiences worldwide in choice snippets and available
verbatim to every geek with a computer. And I know she’s in debt, and
I’m truly glad to see she’s managed to impress the newspapers and
commentators she so desperately needs to sell the book, to make the
millions, to pay the lawyers, to clean up the mess Bill and Monica made.

But I don’t like being asked to admire Lewinsky, even though being born
and raised in America gives me an unpleasant clarity about why the
American media and public, having spent most of last year eating her for
breakfast, are this year happy to orchestrate her rehabilitation. It’s a
penchant for tell-all confessions followed by true-grit struggle and
redemption, plus a healthy dollop of guilt, that has got Americans
working their way towards a love of Monica that rivals their love of
Princess Di. And the parallel is not incidental.

One long afternoon in front of the tube is testimony aplenty to the
American love for public confession. Whether it be about goats and
grandmothers, or daughters who sleep with their similarly aged
step-fathers, there is little Americans won’t divulge for Oprah or an
Oprah-substitute, a live audience and a camera that broadcasts to the
global millions at home.

But simply “letting it out” is no longer the name of the game. After the
successful reactionary and society-wide assault on “victimhood” and the
“culture of complaint”, Oprah now articulates America’s new focus on
moving women past the “whining” stage. “Let it out and do something
about it,” she now coaches. “Or shut up.”

And Monica has done just that. She’s stopped whining, stopped shopping
and stopped looking like she can’t stop eating. And there’s nothing
Americans like more than a success story, although their standards for
success remain tragically low: be thin, be rich and be famous.

Now if that formula sounds depressingly like the one that endeared
Princess Diana to the Americans, here’s another important similarity in
both women’s self-promotion strategies. Both Monica and Di “made it” in
that quintessentially female way - through their relationships with men.
Relationships in which they stood by their men until they were so hurt,
so tragically wronged, that they had to let it out. “I see myself in a
similar situation (to Diana),” Lewinsky revealed in a recent interview.
“I was also wronged by a man who said he loved me.”

And let it out they did, in surprisingly similar ways. In “revelatory”
interviews in which every question was known and every response and
facial gesture scripted. Interviews in which tears and despair were
importantly paired - not with bitterness but with a stoic determination
to survive.

OK, so that’s the name of the game, and she’s playing it. But admire
her? Feel for her, maybe. Want it to work out for her in the end, OK.
After all, she’s been through the spin cycle of the well-practised
presidential bimbo-control machine and, as I’m sure Gennifer Flowers,
Paula Jones, Kathleen Willey and Juanita Broaddrick would testify, this
is not a particularly self-affirming experience.

But if Americans feel guilty about what’s happened to Monica (and what
hasn’t happened to Bill) as a result of their dalliance, they should
stop looking the other way each time another woman tied up with Clinton
reveals not just how trying he finds keeping his pecker in his pants,
but how difficult a time he has understanding the word “no”.

But spare me the spiel about her “self-awareness”, her “articulateness”,
her “poise” and the “quick-witted” way she ducks the questions of those
before whom she has placed herself - dollar signs registering
Bugs-Bunny-like in both eyes.

I would love a woman of my generation to be put in the media spotlight
for all to admire. Someone whose values and behavior somehow capture the
essence and spirit of the women of Generation X as we face the
millennium. There are a number of high-quality candidates out there, but
Lewinsky isn’t one.