---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 1999-10-21
tag: writings
title: Raising a brood of IVF commodities
---
Knowing the identity of their biological parents gives children a sense
of who they are.

IS IT right for doctors to create embryos from donor eggs and sperm for
random donation to infertile couples? Should couples with \`\`spare‘’
embryos left over from successful IVF treatment \`\`donate’’ them to
couples still trying for a baby?

Arguments against such practices are usually grounded in conservative,
often religious ideas about how babies ought to be made: by married
couples engaging in \`\`natural’’ acts of intercourse that may - God
willing - result in conception.

For religious conservatives, the problem with embryo adoption is part
and parcel of the problem with pre-marital sex, contraception, and
infertility treatments such as IVF: the division of sex, marriage and
procreation into separable and interchangeable parts.

But conservative ideas about family formation and the role of the
Almighty in human generation are not de rigueur for those opposed to
embryo adoption. Embryo adoption can, and in my view should, be opposed
because of the critical role biology plays in our society in creating a
child’s sense of who they are, where they belong, and why they matter.

Since the industrial revolution, when all rights and responsibilities
for children - as well as children themselves - were placed in the hands
of the nuclear family, biology has played a fundamental role in
children’s understandings of who they are and where they belong.

When Margaret Thatcher announced \`\`there is no such thing as society,
only individuals and their families’’, she signalled the rise of
economic rationalism as the dominant Western economic and social
paradigm.

An economically rational society is an itinerant and isolating one that
espouses values that are the antithesis of those that bind individuals
together. Extended families and local communities disintegrate in the
absence of values such as trust, interdependence and responsibility,
forfeiting their historical participation in the establishment of
children’s knowledge of self and place.

In such individualistic societies, it is largely children’s biological
parents who are able to give children a sense of continuity: an
understanding of who they are in relation to all those who have come
before them. It is this social fact that partially explains why so many
children and adults have found the experience of being adopted so
traumatic.

Recently, the first children born from anonymous sperm donations have
begun telling similar stories of social dislocation and not belonging.
Like those who have been adopted, these young people see the search for
their biological parent/s as a critical step in discovering their
\`\`true’’ identity.

There is little doubt that that those adopted or conceived from
anonymous sperm donation feel deprived in large part because most of the
people in the world are raised by their \`\`own’’ parents. But this is
precisely the point. The deprivation suffered by many adopted children
and the children of anonymous sperm donors is profoundly social in
nature.

It is because - and only because - children lack a sense of belonging to
a community from which they could draw a sense of self and place, that
voluntarily creating more children who will suffer this deprivation
becomes ethically dubious.

ABC-TV’s Australian Story recently aired a program about a young woman
who has continuing contact with the couple who adopted her baby. The
child knows and loves his biological mother and, as he grows, will be
told the circumstances that led her to relinquish him. By allowing the
young woman to have an ongoing relationship with her biological child,
such \`\`open’’ adoption procedures may go a long way towards minimising
the distress adoption has caused in the past to both relinquishing
mothers and adopted children.

But providing ways for the relatively few children placed for adoption
each year in Australia to maintain contact with their biological parents
is a far cry from deliberately creating such children through the
practice of creating and/or adopting embryos. While any child conceived
from donated eggs or sperm has the right, on their 18th birthday, to
full identifying information about their biological parents, such
legislation falls far short of adequately compensating children for
their loss.

As numerous adult adoptees reveal, it is the non-deliberate nature of
their conception that made the loss they had suffered as a result of
their adoption easier to bear. No one had meant any harm. But if the
child knows they were intentionally conceived in order to be
\`\`donated‘’ by the infertility specialist, or donated by their
biological parents to another infertile couple, all bets are off. Such
children, worries one adult raised by adoptive parents, may wind up
feeling like \`\`a commodity, a powerless pawn at the disposal’’ of the
specialist, their biological parents, or both.

As my research into women’s views of abortion showed, all solutions to
an unwanted pregnancy - be it abortion, adoption or keeping the baby -
involve pain. But unwanted pregnancies do happen, and for the few women
who choose to resolve them by opting for adoption, open adoptions seem
the way to go.

But better still would be to refuse to conceive and/or \`\`donate’’
those always intended to be raised by their non-biological parents. What
possible defence will we give - when such children come knocking on our
doors in 18 years time - for failing to do so?