---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 1999-05-10
tags: ~
title: Why men hold the key to the new feminism
---
All workers, not just parents and not just women, need a life.

ONE of the hallmarks of the feminism of Generation X is a more peaceable
attitude towards men. This is good, because if women are to enter the
next stage of the revolution, we’re going to need them.

Not that we know it. When women discuss the work and childbearing
problem, they do speak of men. They note approvingly what a good father
their partner will be, and how supportive he is of her desire to work.
But when it comes to resolving the conflict between work and parenting,
men exit stage left from women’s musings. Few expect men to contribute
half of the effort necessary to get them back to work after the birth,
and none see the child-care problem as a shared one.

Women’s definition of the work and parenting conflict is how she is
going to take responsibility for her decision to work after she has a
baby (since it is she who is \`\`shirking’’ what society sees as her
full-time mothering obligation). Women do not see the problem as how
they, a couple in which both partners work, are to face the challenge to
their existing work patterns posed by the birth of their child.

Sex-role socialisation is not the only reason women tend to assume all
the responsibility for planning and raising baby. They are also
realists. While studies continue to report improvements over the past 10
years in men’s assumption of child care and housework, they still do
less of both than women, even if both are working full-time.

Men also make more money than women and, if a child is to be cared for
at home, it usually makes more sense for the low-earner to give up work.
Child care is appallingly expensive. Only women with well-paid jobs make
enough to cover the costs for just one child and still have anything
left over, let alone two or three.

At a barbecue last month I met a woman slowly going insane from
providing full-time care to a demanding toddler and a four-year-old. She
yearned to return to the part-time secretarial position she had before
the last child was born. But with the cost of work clothes, travel and
child care, she and her husband had concluded it just was not worth it.
\`\`I just have to wait until they’re at school,‘’ she said, \`\`then it
will be my turn.’’

Government support, in the form of subsidised child care and
anti-discrimination legislation, will go some way to making it
economically rational for women to decide to return to a job they still
have after they give birth. But only workplace reform will deliver to
women the level playing field that will ensure their job is as
worthwhile as it was before they became a mother.

While business lauds itself for providing actual part-time work and set
the 40-hour working week, few women really want such \`\`mummy-track‘’
positions. Being on the mummy-track means getting less interesting work
that, even if done well and in a timely manner, is less valued by
colleagues and superiors. It also means copping the resentment of
colleagues when arriving after 9am and racing out the door at 5pm.
\`\`It’s all right for some,’’ many sneer, forgetting that the reduced
hours mothers work means reduced take-home pay.

Others on the part-time mummy-track, still laden with a full-time
workload, return their status to full-time so at least they get paid for
the work they do.

Mothers don’t want special treatment at work, and they shouldn’t need
it. What they need, like all other Australian workers, is better work
conditions. All workers, not just parents, have a life and
responsibilities outside work, and all would appreciate and benefit from
leaving work every night at a reasonable hour.

Once all workers leave early and together, working mothers benefit.
Firstly, because it’s not only mothers going home to spend the evening
with the kids, but fathers, too. For working women, this means two
people, instead of one, to share child collection, shopping and other
domestic tasks. Secondly, when hiring and firing and promotion time
comes around, the end of the mummy track means working mothers are no
longer disadvantaged in comparison to working fathers, the childless or
parents with older children. In fact, a \`\`reasonable hours for all’’
policy may assist women now parenting full-time to use their husbands
reasonable home arrival time to support well-earned personal time, or to
pursue paid work.

And this is where men come in. Because without an en masse challenge by
working fathers and fathers-to-be to the corporate culture that is (or
will be) depriving them of active fatherhood, Australian workplaces have
little reason to change. While trickles of downshifters abandoning the
rat-race validate our belief that workplace culture is unbalancing our
lives, high unemployment means employers can replace the drop-outs with
fresh-faced recruits, and never question the structural nature of what
went wrong.

Men hold the vast majority of powerful positions in corporate Australia,
and it is for them that current corporate culture is seen - and was
designed - to cater. By joining together, perhaps in one of the newly
forming unions for high-income earners, working fathers and
fathers-to-be could be at the vanguard of the next revolution - a
revolution for the benefit of themselves, working mothers, and every
worker who has things they want to and must do after work.