---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 1999-03-15
title: "Letâ\x80\x99s look at the system, not what we do in bed"
---
IN A new book, A Return to Modesty, 23-year-old American Wendy Shalit
argues that women’s problems spring from their lack of modesty - or, to
put it more crudely, their inability to keep their knickers above their
knees.

Weighing in on the Clinton-Lewinsky affair, Shalit concludes that the
core social problem exposed by Lewinsky’s behavior in the White House is
young women’s lack of sexual and moral inhibitions. I thought it was
their seeming belief that the surest route into the Oval Office is still
on their knees.

It shouldn’t be surprising that Shalit and other twenty-something women,
weaned on Reagan and Thatcherite notions of personal responsibility,
look to women themselves as the source of their own misery. As the Gen X
women in Kathy Bail’s DIY Feminism note, blaming patriarchal society for
female problems makes a girl guilty of “self-pity and the worst kind of
passivity”.

If Bail is right, many Gen X women see the sourcing of female
unhappiness in social causes (or the naming of the personal as the
political) as an unacceptable mimicry of the approach of the previous
generations (“the mothers”). In the eyes of “the daughters”, such
identification prohibits the separation necessary for young women to
create their own generational approach to problems and change.

The advantage of the individual-responsibility approach to women’s
problems is that in claiming our lives are the result of our “choices”,
we emphasise female agency and control.

But allocating agency and control to women’s lives when little exists
leaves us unable to name the political difficulties that are making our
personal lives hell. And if we cannot source a problem back to its
origins in social beliefs and organisation, then we cannot alter the
ideas or institutions that have caused it. We remain stuck, blaming and
hating ourselves for problems for which we actually bear little
responsibility.

And this is only one of the problems with an analysis that places female
sexual conduct at the heart of all that ails women. The second is the
re-activation of the sexual double standard, a re-activation that in the
Abbott and Costello libel case led to the awarding of one of the biggest
defamation payouts in ACT history. A double standard that judges women’s
behavior, and their moral virtue, differently to men’s. A
double-standard that says that while men’s reputations are rightly based
on moral virtues like honesty and integrity, women’s justly revolve
around what they do or don’t do in bed: on whether they are good girls,
or sluts.

The past 30 years have provided women with greater opportunities to live
a life as varied and full as that lived by men. To be able to be not
only parents and partners, but employees as well. Along with this
freedom has come sexual freedom, important less because it gives women
greater licence in bed, but because it helped vanquish the notion that
what women get up to in the sack matters in any assessment of their
characters.

To a large extent, however, employment opportunities for women have been
opened up without the necessary guarantees and supports. Women have been
allowed to work (at roughly three-quarters of the male wage) as long as
they continued to uphold their previous responsibilities as wives and
mothers.

It’s an impossible task, but through the ’80s working women - their
capes flying behind them - tried hard to make it work. When they were
forced to confess defeat at the start of the ’90s, they largely blamed
themselves (lack of organisation, stamina and honesty about the
difficulties were common themes). But the burial of the supermum myth
has not been accompanied by structural solutions to women’s predicament.
To the contrary, structurally and socially, things have become more
difficult, with childcare costs and unpredictable working hours both on
the rise.

My research on young childless women shows that working mothers are not
the only ones feeling confused and unsupported by these changes. Gen X
women, for whom working is an assumption not a debate, are increasingly
worried about their capacity to make a reality all parts of their
imagined futures as employees, partners and mothers.

This, rather than how often they have sex, and with what number of
partners, is the cause of any female malaise. For both women and men,
sex is a small though important part of our lives: a part that has
little to do with defining our characters or dictating our happiness.

The real problem young women face is twofold. Firstly, that the lives we
have and the lives we want contain too much responsibility and not
enough social support. Secondly, that the analytical tools needed to
source responsibility for both the problem and the solution have been
thrown out, in an understandable but damaging attempt to find solutions
unique to our generation.