---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 1999-09-17
tags: ~
title: For the love of Jeff
---
Victoria’s intellectuals are blind to the Premier’s popular appeal.
Here’s why.

ROBERT Manne on this page on Monday (\`\`The state of silence‘’)
bemoaned the apathy of Victorians towards Jeff Kennett’s undercutting of
democracy. Such indifference, argued Manne, means Victorians must
ultimately bear responsibility for anti-democratic outcomes such as the
silencing of public servants, the nobbling of the director of public
prosecutions and the auditor-general, and the demonising of
\`\`quality’’ media such as the ABC and The Age.

Manne’s argument exemplifies the frustration of academic and
journalistic intellectual elites - aka the chattering classes - at our
inability to use our knowledge and reason to convince \`\`ordinary’’
Victorians to punish the Liberals at the ballot box tomorrow.

Having grown up in Reagan’s America, this frustration has a familiar
feel for me. Like Victorian intellectuals today, American intellectuals
back then were aghast at the anti-democratic policies and practices of
the Reagan administration. And, like their Victorian counterparts now,
American intellectuals then sought to persuade their countrymen that
Reagan’s contempt for democracy merited his removal from office.

But more importantly, America’s chattering classes refused either to
acknowledge or to analyse - in public at least - the indifference of
most Americans to their knowledgeable and well-reasoned rejections of
Reagan’s demagogic and populist leadership. Indeed, the most profound
analyses of Reagan’s enduring popularity were that he was made of teflon
and that the average person was incapable of understanding the
importance of the separation of powers to American democracy.

Like America’s elite in the 1980s, Victoria’s intelligentsia in the
1990s have either ignored their inability to stop the rising tide of
Jeff-worship, or proffered condescending explanations of the public’s
failure to heed their warnings.

With so much ink having been used on the subject of why Victorians
should vote against Kennett, it may be appropriate to dedicate some
space to pondering the indifference of the vast majority of Victorians
to this message.

In my view, this ineffectiveness stems from the inability of Victorian
intellectuals to recognise and acknowledge that we - unlike most
Victorians - are stakeholders in the processes essential to democracy.
Intellectuals assume that public policy decisions are, and ought to be,
knowledge-based, and that we will be the source of much of that
knowledge.

We believe that democratic participation gives power to \`\`the people‘’
to shape and share in the exercise of power. Most importantly, we
include ourselves among \`\`the people’’ who not only have a
responsibility to participate, but whose participation is valued, and
will make a difference to the way things turn out.

Many Victorians lack the sense of enfranchisement and empowerment that
we intellectuals presume. They don’t expect to participate in decisions
that affect them, nor necessarily see the value in doing so. They would
like a fair go, but don’t necessarily expect they will get one.

It may be that our assumptions about the nature of power and our
relation to it are learnt early. When I am treated unjustly, I rant
about ringing the ombudsman, or bang out indignant letters of complaint
to my local member. My husband’s upbringing was less privileged than
mine. He watches these energetic bouts with a wry smile and asks,
\`\`Why don’t you save yourself the trouble and just bend over and take
it?’’

I see my efforts as meaningful and necessary gyrations in the search for
a justice I deserve and that can be achieved. He sees them as silly
ram-like batterings at a system that owes me nothing, and will see me
where it wants me in the end. For him, the only realistic approach to
power is to placate its hunger, and by so doing, avoid the worst of its
wrath.

This attitude to power explains the Victorian public’s love affair with
our despotic Premier, and their antagonism to the nation’s intellectual
elites.

In the eyes of \`\`ordinary’’ Victorians, Kennett’s more realistic
understanding of the realities of power puts them on an equal footing
with intellectual elites. The Premier’s intuitive - rather than
knowledge-driven - style of decision-making strips the intelligentsia of
their privileged access to the Kingdom’s decision-makers. His disdain
for the dogged pursuit of power and influence by special interestgroups
sees him cut through the red tape of the process-lovers, to get on with
the business of governing for the majority.

Kennett has power and he is on the side of \`\`ordinary‘’ Victorians.
For many Victorians, cultivating the favor of powerful friends is the
best - indeed the only - way to avoid \`\`bending over’’.

Like the Premier, many Victorians see the pursuit by media organisations
such as the ABC and The Age of honest and accountable government, as
stupid and irrelevant. Far from seeing their interests served by
highbrow reporters on the trail of the truth, many Victorians seem to
concur with Kennett’s assessment of such scrutiny as the nitpicking
obsession of pedants with little grasp of the concerns of \`\`ordinary’’
Victorians.

If we are to fathom why the majority tomorrow will fail to heed our
calls to protest against the upending of democracy in Victoria, we
intellectuals need to take a hard look at ourselves. We must acknowledge
how our alignment with power shapes our assumptions about, and valuing
of, democracy, and how those with a different understanding of how power
operates, and a less robust sense of personal entitlement, have come to
see us - not Kennett - as the enemy.