---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2000-02-12
title: 'School hours: did feminism drop the ball?'
---
Working parents may not be able to rely on the women’s movement to help
them.

JOHN HOWARD is no feminist. So perhaps it’s no surprise that his
recently stated desire to promote a better balance between work and
family by extending school hours went down like a lead balloon with
feminists.

While the reasons for this are complex, several important ones suggest
that the women’s movement may no longer be the best organisation to
articulate the plight of working parents, and to fight for a
re-balancing of their employment and family responsibilities.

The difficulties that school hours and school holidays pose for working
parents are legion. While schools are only one institution posing
problems for working parents, and institutions only one source of the
imbalance equation, Howard’s comments provided an opening to press for a
round-table discussion on the issue. Such a summit should include
high-level representatives of parents, teachers, young people, business
and government.

Polls in America, Britain and Australia show that women nominate the
lack of balance between their work and family responsibilities as their
most pressing problem. Yet emerging data suggests that men increasingly
expect to play an active role in raising their children, despite
spending an average of four hours more a week at the office than women.

Indeed, Australian Bureau of Statistics figures last week showed that
about a third of managers, professionals and associate professionals -
most of whom are male, parents and aged between 35 and 60 - want to work
fewer hours.

So why did the women’s movement drop the ball on Howard’s
need-for-better-balance comments? One important reason was the desire
not to antagonise teachers (most of whom are women) and the teachers
union, which is a traditional ally. The union came out early against the
plan because of understandable fears that its implementation would be
inadequately funded, and so come at the cost of already overburdened
teachers.

But good mummy/bad mummy politics may also have played a part in the
speedy rejection of Howard’s plan. Letters from concerned parents and
children flooded newspapers, defending the well-earned right of children
to go home at 3.30 to frolic in the creek, pick daisies in the park and
otherwise rejuvenate.

The Opposition Leader, Kim Beazley, joined in the condemnation of
uncaring parents who might support the plan when he rejected it on the
grounds that he would \`\`not want (his) child (riding home) on the
roads’’ at 5pm.

The sub-textual condemnation of working parents in general and working
mothers in particular is not hard to discern, although several letters
spelt it out anyway: children should not suffer longer hours at school
for the convenience of their career-driven mothers. Such charges of
selfishness were not only levelled at any woman who would dare speak up
in support of the extended school hours plan, but tarred all those whose
children are enrolled in out-of-school-hours programs.

Good mummy/bad mummy politics are a landmine for the women’s movement.
Many women marching under the anti-feminist or the
I’m-not-a-feminist-but banners believe, rightly or wrongly, that the
feminist movement supports only working women, and devalues the role of
those who choose to defer or play down workforce participation to care
for their children.

The women’s movement’s support for Howard’s proposal would only further
entrench these women’s beliefs that feminists see little value in their
decision not to work, or to work part-time to be there when the school
bell rings at 3.30.

Limited resources (for example, the Howard Government recently de-funded
the Women’s Electoral Lobby) is another reason the women’s movement
would benefit from concentrating all its attention on traditional
feminist and unquestionably gender-based issues concerning women and
work - issues such as equal pay, sexual harassment and glass ceilings.

Ironically, such a concentration may also bring more women back into the
feminist fold because nearly all women believe - no matter how
stridently anti-feminist their rhetoric - that they have a right to as
much pay, as much safety and as much opportunity for advancement at work
as any man.

Bringing men into the fight for work/family balance better reflects the
reality and ideal of male involvement in parenting. More importantly,
until working fathers start kicking up a fuss - and threatening to down
tools, alongside working mothers - nothing is going to change.

School hours are only the tip of the iceberg when it comes to the
problems facing working mothers and fathers. Working parents missed the
opportunity that Howard’s comments offered to begin a discussion at the
community and political level about the degraded quality of life they
and their children have as a result of the incongruence between
institutions such as school and work, and the demands of parenthood. It
may be that we can no longer expect the women’s movement to take up this
fight on our behalf.

Perhaps, if we use the time until the Government’s next political
opening organising a new movement for change - I’d call it Parents for
Balance - we won’t have to see the next opportunity float by.