---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2000-02-03
title: Do nice guys finish last?
---
The latest theory out of America about rape is not just wrong, it’s
dangerous.

AMERICAN band Green Day’s Nice Guys Finish Last came in at No. 89 in
this summer’s Hottest 100 on Triple J. But if the social Darwinian
theories of American academics Randy Thornhill and Greg Palmer are
right, some of the guys who finish last in the race for partners aren’t
very nice guys.

You’ve got to say one thing for Thornhill and Palmer, they sure know how
to grab media attention. A few weeks ago, they were Dr Nobodies: one
holed up in the anthropology department at the University of Colorado,
the other with his face pressed to the glass of scorpionfly cages in New
Mexico. Now their theories have been headlined in The Chicago Tribune,
The New York Times, USA Today, Time Magazine, The Washington Post and
The Guardian. They’ve been on Rush Limbaugh’s radio program, CNN, the
CBS Early Show with Bryant Gumbel, and NBC’s Today Show, to name a few.

Clearly the strategy of accusing feminist beliefs - in this case that
rape is motivated by a male thirst for power rather than sex - of being
one-eyed and evidence-free is the calling-card for success with the
overseas and domestic press.

Unfortunately, both Thornhill and Palmer seem unperturbed by the fact
that the evidence they provide to support their claims is flimsy and at
times nonsensical.

They contend that rape is an unchangeable though undesirable biological
phenomenon, much like a tornado or flood, and that it is about sex (by
which they mean the Darwinian, programmed desire of all animals to pass
on their genes). Men who have been unsuccessful in attracting a female
with whom to copulate consensually use rape as a strategy to pass along
their genetic legacy.

But the most persuasive evidence Thornhill and Palmer could muster - and
I am truly too embarrassed to repeat their less convincing supporting
facts - are that most rape victims are women of child-bearing age, and
that rape occurs in a variety of animal species.

What they fail to mention is that most rapists are also of child-bearing
age. Not only are these men more likely to have greater access to
similarly aged women, but women of this age are more likely than the
very young or very old to be out and about and so at risk of stranger
rape. They are also more likely to be socially and sexually active and
so at higher risk of “date” rape.

Evolutionary academics have a penchant for picking from the natural
world that which suits their usually sexist theories, and ignoring the
rest. This means that the naturalness of human breeding and
child-rearing practices are never explained with reference to the
extracurricular sexual activities of the female emu, which roots around
while the male stays back at the nest hatching the eggs. Instead, they
are seen as akin - in this case - to the mating habits of scorpionflies.

The scorpionfly, we are told, has a clamp-like appendage that seems
specially designed for rape. While no similar appendage has yet been
located on the human male, our headline doctors proffer this discovery
as proof of the pervasiveness of rape in the animal kingdom, and so the
naturalness and immutability of its occurrence among humans. In my view,
scorpionfly behavior tells us as much (or as little) as does emu
behavior about what is natural for humans. Call me a nut.

But the strongest piece of evidence the Darwinian theory of rape has
going for it - other than prime-time ratings - is the simple fact that
many sexual assaults do not involve the rapist penetrating the woman’s
vagina with his penis. And even when he does, he doesn’t always
ejaculate. In addition, men rape other men, old women and children, a
third of whom are boys. This, if I am not mistaken, puts the
men-rape-to-spread-their-genes-around theory in a bit of a bind. It
means that unless the evolutionary drive isn’t the brightest light in
the harbor, it is a bad explanation for why and whom men choose to rape.

And if rape is a “successful” reproductive strategy, as our academics
claim, you’ve got to wonder for whom. Sexual selection is a key aspect
of Darwin’s survival-of-the-fittest theory. Put crudely, it gives female
desires a strong say in the selection of a species’ characteristics.
Peacock plumage is a lightning rod for the bird’s predators, yet by
making the cock more attractive to the hen, the bird with the largest,
most colorful plumage is at an advantage in the sexual selection stakes.

If a woman knocks back a bloke’s request for consensual sex, and he
rapes her, he upsets the delicate balance of sexual selection by -
should he actually impregnate her - spreading his \`\`unfit’’ genes
around. Good for the individual male in question, maybe. Good - in
Darwinian terms - for the human species? I don’t think so.

Thornhill and Palmer’s reinstatement of the boys-will-be-boys thesis
about why men rape has upset both men and women. Men are peeved at being
re-tarred with the all-men-are-potential-rapists brush. Women involved
in counselling sexual assault survivors are worried that such
theoretical walks in the woods might reverse hard-won political, legal
and treatment trends that lay responsibility for sexual violence at
men’s feet, rather than at women’s hemlines.

But they needn’t worry. Claims by some angry anti-feminists that
Thornhill and Palmer’s work is being knocked off by an aggressive case
of feminist political correctness - the standard ploy for keeping
anti-feminist agendas in the media for longer than they merit - won’t
work for long. Thornhill and Palmer’s thesis simply doesn’t stack up.
And there are too many nice (and knowledgeable) men and women that say
so.