---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2000-04-05
tag: writings
title: "Itâ\x80\x99s his baby too, give him paid leave"
---
Both new parents, not just mum, should get time off work.

Nurse to Kathy Lette, in excruciating pain from labor, and awaiting the
father of her child in the ward: \`\`Don’t worry. Some men just don’t
want to be here.’’

Lette, angrily: \`\`Hey. I‘d prefer not to be here!’’

TONY BLAIR has admitted he isn’t sure whether he’ll take paternity leave
inMay, when wife Cherie is due to drop the couple’s fourth bundle. While
Cherie was publicly expressing her interest in seeing Tony take
advantage of his right to leave, he was mumbling about his pressing
responsibilities to ensure the country was properly run.

An astounding 57 per cent of Britons agreed that, while it is a good
idea for a new father to take time off to help, Tony’s job was too
important for him to do so.

Of course, Cherie also has an important job. She’s a QC, a judge and a
leading employment rights lawyer. However, no prizes for guessing how
the British public would have responded had she announced her intention
to get straight back to work after the baby was born. \`\`I have a
courtroom to run,’’ one can hear her insisting, while she dodges rotten
tomatoes and the deafening sound of public accusations of bad
motherhood.

The point, of course, is that despite the calendar showing the year
2000, many people still hold distinctly 1950s views about the
differences between the feelings mothers and fathers have about new
babies, and their respective responsibilities for child care.

Such dated mythology holds that the maternal instinct leads women to
yearn to provide infant care, and to be uniquely suited to doing so. So
fulfilled are women by nurturing babies in their bodies and at their
breasts that they don’t even notice - little less mind - the devastating
impact the baby has on their former existence as a grown-up. They yearn
to take time out from their careers and to be there at those 3am feeds.
The symbiotic nature of the maternal-child bond also means the baby is
completely satiated by its mother’s - but only its mother’s - nurturing
and love.

So where exactly does that leave Dad? Most likely folding the laundry,
screening calls and worrying about paying the mounting pile of bills
with no money coming in. No wonder he yearns to stay at work, or to get
back as soon as possible. It is at work that his role outside and inside
the family is socially recognised and sanctioned: as paid worker and
family breadwinner.

While both the British and Australian Governments mandate the provision
of parental leave (up to 52 weeks for Australian mums and dads, and 13
weeks for British dads and 40 for mums), only British mums are entitled
to be paid for any of that. While the enormous costs to working mothers
of unpaid maternity leave are recognised, the cost to working fathers is
less often discussed.

The governments’ refusal to ensure adequate paid paternity leave
reinforces the view that men are dispensable at home, but not at work.
Few families can afford to go without both earners for long, and
maternal mythology and the greater likelihood that a workplace agreement
will ensure the woman gets at least part of her maternity leave paid,
makes it more likely the person staying at home will be mum.

The Swedes solve this problem by providing a full year of parental leave
paid at 85per cent of the lost wage, at least a month of which must be
taken by the father or forfeited. By paying fathers and mothers to
parent, the Swedish Government is reinforcing family-values talk with
real action - action that ensures parents understand that their
contribution as a parent as well as as a worker is socially valued.

Blair has been criticised by some commentators for refusing to make what
amounts to the symbolic gesture of taking a week or two of paternity
leave. But taking paternity leave must have more than symbolic value to
truly transform the social and parental roles of men and women.

Regardless of which way Blair jumps, the behavior of British fathers
towards paternity leave - and paternity in general - is unlikely to
change until they are told, in both words and dollars, that they are as
needed and important at home as they are at the office.