---
assets: ~
published: 2000-03-16
tags: ~
title: The population debate we have to have
---
It’s easier to talk about immigration than about why we’re having fewer
children.

LAST week the Prime Minister reopened the debate about Australia’s
population. After years of Hanson-inspired silence, there are even
whispers of a bipartisan policy approach.

Debates in Australia about population policy typically disintegrate into
haggling about migration numbers, and this time was no different.
Indeed, some media outlets didn’t even bother to report Howard’s
interest in a comprehensive debate about population, while others gave
only a one-line mention to his open mind on population. Instead, the
media focused on the Government’s policy shift on migrant numbers.

Population is not a synonym for migration, so why do politicians and the
media constantly equate the two? More importantly, who loses out when
they do?

The size of our population is primarily determined by how many babies we
have. Over the past decade, Australia’s fertility rate has dropped
precipitously. Australian woman averaged 1.9 babies at the start of the
1990s; by the end of the decade the figure was 1.75.

What this means is that each year Australians move further away from
bringing enough children into the world - around 2.1 per woman - to
replace the number of Australians dying.

In this, we are far from alone. Few Western countries have fertility
levels that are at or above replacement levels.

Yet despite sporadic fretting about declining fertility in the Western
world - an Italian demographer recently predicted the demise of the
Italian people unless that country was able to halt the fall in its
fertility rate - no committees are being assembled and research
commissioned to investigate the problem and propose policy solutions.

One reason is the difficulty in even gaining agreement that falling
population is a problem. Some contend, among them the New South Wales
Premier, Bob Carr, that our current numbers are overwhelming our fragile
ecosystem and limited infrastructure.

Those in favor of population growth tend to be economic rationalists
convinced that greater numbers will fuel economic prosperity and lift
our international standing. In addition, patriarchal societies have long
seen child-bearing as a woman’s patriotic duty. As Jeff Kennett
discovered, this can make any mention of the issue politically risky.

If declining fertility represented the desire of increasing numbers of
women and men to have fewer children or no children at all, I’d fully
support the current do-nothing-and-for-God’s-sake-don’t-talk-about-it
approach.

However, what little data is available suggests that the steady decline
in Australia’s birthrate since 1961 is evidence of the ever-widening gap
between the number of children we want, and the number of children we
have.

The problem with falling population, in other words, is that it
represents an erosion of women’s and men’s freedom to embrace
parenthood.

For instance, one study found that tertiary-educated Australian women in
their 20s intended to have an average of 2.3 children each, but as they
moved into their 30s, their expectations dropped sharply. At current
rates, these women are not even likely to meet their lowered fertility
expectations.

Less educated women, while wanting on average just under two children
each, come much closer to having the number they want. However, this may
be about to change. New figures from the Australian Institute of Family
Studies show that while fertility rates are dropping for all women,
those of less educated women with poorer job prospects are declining
quickest of all. What all this means is that the longstanding
relationship in developing countries between higher rates of female
education and lower rates of fertility doesn’t explain fertility
patterns in the developed world. It seems higher education and
employment levels don’t lead women to want fewer children, but to have
fewer than they want.

The reasons for this are not hard to guess. Getting educated takes time,
and leads women to put off having children. Getting established in a
career also takes time, and leads women to delay even longer. Getting so
established at work that a woman is able to negotiate a family-friendly
work arrangement that won’t bankrupt her, turn her hair grey or put her
on the mummy track could conceivably - in a time of unequal opportunity
and pay - take a lifetime.

The limited lifespan of female fertility means such delays may result in
a woman having fewer children than she intended, or no children at all.

The upshot of all this is that the incompatibility of child-bearing and
child-rearing with the demands of the lean and mean modern-day workforce
- and the aggravation of that incompatibility by sex discrimination - is
an issue that bears directly on the population question. No wonder
politicians are happy to restrict debates on population to questions of
immigration. Debates on the causes of declining fertility could make
arguments about migrant numbers look like fun.

But curtailment of this important debate comes at a high cost for
present and potential parents and children. So, as our political leaders
gear up for the annual carry-on about migrant numbers, prospective and
actual parents need to ensure their elected representatives canvass all
the causes and cures for our declining numbers.

The wellbeing of our families - and the existence of those we hope to
have - depends on it.