---
assets: ~
published: 2000-04-08
tags: ~
title: "It didnâ\x80\x99t start with a kissâ\x80¦"
---
HOW DOES this generation define a transcendent relationship, a perfect
twosome, the ultimate love? In his construction of the relationship
between Gen-X FBI agents Dana Scully and Fox Mulder, the Australian-born
creator of The X-Files, Chris Carter, has taken a leaf from the
Victorian era, and added a distinctive 21st-century twist.

HOW DOES this generation define a transcendent relationship, a perfect
twosome, the ultimate love? In his construction of the relationship
between Gen-X FBI agents Dana Scully and Fox Mulder, the Australian-born
creator of The X-Files, Chris Carter, has taken a leaf from the
Victorian era, and added a distinctive 21st-century twist.

Since the start of The X-Files, Carter has insisted there would be no
shagging between the two agents, despite studio pressure for what he
derisively refers to as a \`\`David and Maddy‘’ thing. Carter’s reason?
He wanted their relationship to be \`\`more interesting’’ than that.

But what could be more interesting than shagging? Throughout the early
days of the series, before all my energy went into staying on top of the
conspiracy sub-plot, I yearned for the agents to consummate their
relationship. Judging from X-Files Internet bulletin boards and chatroom
buzz, I was far from alone. Neither character was with anyone else, at
least not for long, and each death-defying adventure tested and
confirmed the soundness of their trust in one another in a world
increasingly exposed as irrational and conspiracy-ridden. They were
clearly falling in love; why didn’t they just go to bed?

Of course, Carter is not the first to explore the possibilities of
platonic love. Indeed, it is only in the past hundred or so years that
Western societies have seriously entertained the possibility of
combining true love, sexual desire and the business of marriage all in
one relationship. Before this, the person with whom one was passionately
\`\`in love‘’ was rarely either the person one desperately wanted to
shag or to shack up with domestically. While spousal pairs saw to the
business of running a household and creating and raising children, messy
and unpredictable sexual passions were the province of the lover. True
love was typically reserved for a special or \`\`sentimental’’ friend of
the same gender.

This was not only because it was believed that sexual passions were
ephemeral and, thus, inappropriate in any relationship in which
stability was required, but also because the meeting of mind and spirit
characteristic of true love was unlikely to take place between members
of the opposite sex. Upper-class men and women were raised and educated
separately and lived their lives in separate \`\`spheres’’. Not only did
they have little in common, they also were raised to profoundly distrust
one another. Men were encouraged to think of women as their intellectual
inferiors.

Scully and Mulder are also very different. In an inversion of the usual
stereotype, Scully is the rational medical scientist, and Mulder the
instinct-driven paranormal expert. However, because their relationship
is grounded in trust, intellectual respect and their shared search for
\`\`the truth’’, these differences are seen to draw the pair closer and
enrich the meaning of their journey together, rather than estrange them.
Indeed, it is the rock-solid nature of their trust - a trust that
contrasts strongly with their attitude to the rest of the world - that
is the basis of their transcendent love. In my dreams, Mulder tells
Scully, you were the only one who told me the truth. Even when my world
was falling apart, you were my constant, my touchstone.

With these words, I felt my fervent desire to see them fall into bed
together evaporate. They could; they didn’t have to; who cared? Where
else could sex take them that they hadn’t already been?

Two episodes later, having realised they no longer needed to avoid sex
because of the Victorian fear - couched in modern-day lingo - of
\`\`screwing up the relationship‘’, Scully and Mulder kiss. It happens
right after they have successfully vanquished a millennium cult and are
watching the ball descend in Times Square on television. Then they smile
at one another. \`\`The world didn’t end,’’ Mulder mumbles. \`\`No, it
didn’t,’’ Scully replies. And, with their arms around one another, they
head down the hall to begin the New Year.

Scully and Mulder are Gen-Xers engaged in the quintessential
21st-century relationship - it takes place at work, is based in trust,
respectful of intellectual difference and shag-neutral. Such a prototype
should be unsurprising for a generation whose youthful reality, unlike
those who came immediately before, included venereal diseases that kill
and increasing amounts of time spent in cyberspace, where the nature of
sex - among other things - is constantly evolving.

So maybe this couple will shag and maybe they won’t. The important thing
is that their relationship neither needs sex, nor needs sex kept out of
it. This love is other than that.