---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2000-04-28
title: "A motherâ\x80\x99s birthright"
---
A woman-centred approach to birth includes the right to choose drugs.

CHILDBIRTH was the most painful experience of my life. I did it both
times without any pain relief beyond nitrous oxide gas, but only the
first time was by choice. The second time, had I been able to choose, I
would have had an epidural, or at least some pethidine or morphine.

I didn’t have a choice because I was cared for exclusively by midwives
in a birth centre. I liked the birth centre, and I liked laboring under
the care of midwives who had looked after me during my pregnancy.
Because I didn’t regard either of my low-risk pregnancies as illnesses,
I felt there was no reason for my labor to be overseen by doctors in a
hospital ward.

But while the birth centre I attended, like most in Australia, had
\`\`standing orders’’ to provide me with gas, I had to reconsider my
options when I wanted more serious painkillers. I could remain at the
birth centre under the care of the midwives I knew and trusted - and
accept what I saw as unacceptable amounts of pain - or I could transfer
to a hospital ward and into the primary care of doctors I didn’t know,
in order to get the pain relief I wanted. Some choice!

While most Victorian women labor under the care of midwives, only a tiny
percentage have midwives as their primary carers.

A recent national report has called for resources to be made available
to address the unmet demand for birth centres in every state. In
addition, doctors will face increasing pressure to allow midwives to
assume the status of primary carer for all women having normal, low-risk
births.

One of the reasons doctors are under pressure to cede more of the
responsibility for normal births to midwives is because of what the
World Health Organisation considers unacceptably high levels of
intervention in births, where the doctor calls the shots.

WHO believes 85 per cent of women should give birth without any
intervention, Australian women have a significantly higher intervention
rate.

Opposition to intervention in normal births has come from a number of
groups. One such group is a coalition of midwives and mothers and forms
part of what is known as the \`\`natural childbirth movement’’.

Historically, this movement’s embrace of intervention-free birth and
exclusive breastfeeding as \`\`natural" and \`\`best for baby’’ has been
part of an overall belief in the natural capacity of women to give birth
to, feed and care for children.

These beliefs support a view that in most cases pain relief, like most
birth interventions, is unnatural and unnecessary, damaging for the baby
and can possibly disrupt the natural bonding process that occurs at
birth.

Feminists are longstanding - though strange - bedfellows of the natural
childbirth movement. Feminists also seek less medical intervention in
childbirth, but their objection to intervention is that it strips women
of their \`\`control’’ of the birth process.

Many feminists are unsupportive of pharmacological pain relief because
it deprives women of an \`\`active‘’ and \`\`conscious’’ birth and is
the tool of the enemy - the medical profession that usurped the control
female healers and midwives once had over birth.

Of course, both groups have practical and ideological reasons for their
less than enthusiastic stance on pain-relief drugs. The reality is that
the current range of pain-relief drugs can disrupt a woman’s labor,
leading to a \`\`cascade’’ of unwanted interventions such as a drip to
get things moving again, a baby suffering respiratory distress and/or a
forceps or caesarean delivery.

But having defined a woman-centred/feminist birth as free from
pharmacological pain relief, both natural childbirth advocates and
feminists tend to minimise the pain of labor by employing euphemisms
such as \`\`intensity’’, and exaggerate the efficacy of the
non-pharmacological forms of pain relief such as baths and massages, or
both.

While I can see how this happened, I can’t support it. Any group batting
for women must accept that some of us want a less interventionist and
more woman-centred birth, and the best pain-relieving drugs money can
buy.

Not only should natural childbirth advocates and feminists fight for the
right to dispense such drugs to informed and consenting women, they
should put their considerable skills and energies into fighting for a
better choice of pain relief than what is now available.

Although I would have taken what was on offer, my real choice would have
been a drug that effectively managed my pain, but also had a negligible
impact both on my foetus and the course of my labor.

Pain is not noble, and it is not \`\`intensity’’. It is pain, and it
sucks. Women should be given a choice about the sort of pain relief they
want.

If they decide to have drugs, they should have the right for the drugs
to be delivered by the carer of their choice - be it a midwife or a
doctor. Those who want to take the pharmacological option need a wider
range of choices than those currently available.

A woman-centred approach to birth is about expanding women’s rights and
choices, and having effective pain-relieving drugs during labor is as
legitimate a choice as any other.