---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2000-07-07
tags: ~
title: The Horrible Dilemma of the Pregnant Woman
---
She is pushed to have all the tests, then damned if she terminate late

Abortion is in the criminal code in many states in Australia, including
the state of Victoria, of which Melbourne is the capital. However, in
1969 the state court ruled that abortion was defensible if the doctor
honestly believed on reasonable grounds that it was necessary to
preserve the woman’s physical or mental health. While this judgements
has resulted in Victorian women having good access to safe termination
services early in pregnancy, it also clearly established abortion as a
medical prerogative, not a woman’s “choice,” or “right.” Indeed, after
the story of the 32-week abortion was leaked to the press, the Royal
Women’s quickly established an inquiry to reassure the public that they
would be assessing the reasons doctors had for performing the
termination.

News reports of the complex case at the Royal Women’s - about which
nothing has been heard from the woman herself - have focused less on the
legal aspects of the case, and more on the ethical issues usually seen
to surround late-term abortions: the late gestational age of the fetus
and the seriousness of its predicted disability. While only 5 per cent
of terminations are performed after 14 weeks, around half of these are
done because of potential damage to the fetus.

My research suggests that while most women see abortion as a moral
issue, they nominate different ethical concerns to the masculinist ones
mainstream academics and journalists glibly presume to be at issue. Such
views equate “viable” fetuses with babies born, and consequently reduce
pregnancy to an issue of “fetal location.”

Women, not surprisingly, see the relationship between mother and fetus
as meaningful and at the heart of the moral issues that surround
abortion. Many see the pregnant woman as morally obliged to commit as
early as possible either to gestating the fetus and raising the child
that results, or to obtaining a termination.

The Royal Women’s case demonstrates how social and medical attitudes and
practices surrounding pregnancy may, by imposing alternative ethical
requirements on pregnant women, alienate them from their own intuitive
understanding of the range and limits of the moral obligations that
arise from the “pregnant relationship:” the evolving relationship
between the pregnant woman and her fetus.

During pregnancy a woman is becoming a mother, a process she completes
when the child is born. At the center of this becoming is her evolving
relationship with her fetus. For most women this relationship is
initially only known, not felt (“The line in the box on the stick says I
am pregnant but I don’t feel anything.”), but it comes to occupy the
center of her thoughts, dreams, hopes and body by the time the baby is
due. Most women increasingly come to love the fetus inside them as it
progressively makes its presence felt in her body and life. As time goes
on, they grow eager for the baby to emerge from their bodies, where they
will “consummate” the relationship begun in-utero, through sight, smell,
touch and nurture.

The existence and practice of antenatal screening imposes other ethical
imperatives on women, while the limitations of the screens may hinder
the normal development of the relationship between mother and fetus.

Ethicist Paul Laurtizen believes the mere existence of medical
technology can compel people to “choose” it. In other words, if a woman
does not choose to have a pre-natal screen and she gives birth to a
disabled child, some will see her as having chosen to have a child with
a disability (and therefore as solely responsible for the social and
financial costs of its care).

The vast majority of doctors are enthusiastic supporters of antenatal
screening. They assume women do and should choose these tests only when
they are willing to terminate a fetus with a disability, and many expect
and encourage women to choose termination when test results are
“negative.”

This enthusiasm takes place against a backdrop of social
indifference~~~~some would say antagonism~~~~towards people with
disabilities.

However, some antenatal tests, such as the one for dwarfism, can only be
performed very late in pregnancy.

These pressures put women in a bind. They are seen as morally
irresponsible if they decide against screening, or refuse to terminate
an anomalous fetus, but are castigated as callous and unmaternal if they
do decide to terminate a disabled fetus late in pregnancy. In addition,
the pressure to screen and terminate runs counter to the attachment and
commitment many women feel and believe they should feel to their fetus.

Some may seek to resolve these dilemmas by holding off coming to know,
love and commit to the fetus inside them until they have been given the
medical “all-clear.” Remaining “tentative” about their pregnancy, to use
ethicist Barbara Rothman’s phrase, may be a woman’s best way of
protecting herself emotionally as she tries to negotiate the
contradictory moral demands imposed on her by the medical profession and
society.

Some have argued that the Royal Women’s Hospital case demonstrates the
ethical burdens faced by the medical profession and the urgent need for
law reform. I would argue that what this case mostly demonstrates is the
untenable moral and practical burdens imposed on pregnant women in
Australian society.

As the technological management of pregnancy increases and the tools in
the medical armory expand, women are faced with increasingly difficult
and intensely personal moral decisions, and increasingly harsh social
judgments of the way they make them—no matter what they choose.

Greater respect for women’s moral agency and support of their struggle
to make moral choices that make practical sense in an increasingly
complex and constraining world are desperately needed.

Reforming the law to put the choice in women’s capable hands is only a
start.