---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2000-06-03
title: Best, yes, but for whom?
---
BREASTFEEDING: what could be more simple? Best for mother, best for
baby, the obvious and necessary feeding choice for all mums, and the
only one ethical health professionals can support. Most women reading
this would find such "facts’’ familiar.

The gut-wrenching feelings of guilt and inadequacy that accompany such
pronouncements might also feel familiar. Because when it comes to
breastfeeding, most of us feel like failures: either because we didn’t
try to or didn’t succeed at breast-feeding our babies, or we fear we
didn’t feed for long enough.

Women are consistently told that the nutritional superiority of breast
milk makes breastfeeding the only \`\`choice‘’ for any mother who really
cares about her baby. To ensure the maximum number of women \`\`choose’’
breastfeeding, public health officials, health professionals and
breastfeeding advocates see themselves as justified in doing whatever it
takes to \`\`support‘’ breastfeeding and to \`\`actively discourage’’
formula feeding.

Women may decide not to initiate or to continue breastfeeding for a
range of reasons. They may not feel comfortable exposing their breast in
public, they may \`\`fail’’ because of supply problems or mastitis, or
they may have had enough after three or four months and want to hand
over primary care to Dad.

The bar that today’s \`\`successful‘’ breastfeeders must leap is
considerably higher than that needing to be vaulted by previous
generations. Twenty years ago, breastfeeding was recommended for three
months. Soon after target was set at six months. Now the World Health
Organisation says all women (regardless of where they live and the
adequacy of alternative food supplies) should breastfeed \`\`into the
second year and beyond’’. Accordingly, many Australian researchers have
begun pushing the government to adopt one-year targets.

The benefits claimed for breastfeeding are also on the rise, although
advocates consistently fail to disclose the significant controversies
among researchers about whether such benefits exist and whether they are
caused (or just correlated) with breastfeeding. Selective reporting of
research findings is also rife.

My favorite is a recent study that showed that while breastfeeding
lowered breast cancer rates in pre-menopausal women, it appeared to
raise the incidence of breast cancer in post-menopausal women. You’ll
find the former finding in the fact sheets distributed by the La Leche
League; the latter is strangely absent.

But the biggest problem is that breastfeeding advocates confuse
decisions about breast milk with decisions about breastfeeding. Even
women who have no doubts that breast milk is nutritionally superior to
formula may make an informed and caring decision that, in their
situation, breastfeeding is not the best choice.

This is because women don’t base infant-feeding decisions only on the
respective qualities of the milk, but also on the costs and benefits of
each feeding method to their infant, their other children, themselves,
their partners and their family as a whole. For example, a woman may
weigh up the \`\`risk’’ to her infant of giving some formula at three
months so she can return to her full-time job, against that of losing
her job altogether or falling out of the loop because of the extensive
amount of time needed during the work day to express milk. Not only
might the woman value her job as an important source of self-esteem and
financial independence, her income may be essential to the family’s
meeting its commitments to a mortgage or private school.

When a woman makes a decision according to her own values about how she
is going to feed her infant, this decision merits support and respect
regardless of what it is. For this to happen, a number of policies,
practices and attitudes are going to need to change.

The first is the accuracy of the information disseminated to women about
breast and formula feeding. Such information needs to distinguish
between infant milk (breast and formula) and infant-feeding decisions.
It must also either reveal all the confusing and contradictory findings
and debates about the relative merits of breast milk and formula, or
report only those findings about which there is little disagreement.

There also needs to be changes in workplace structure and attitudes to
enable women who want to breastfeed to do so for as long as they wish
without fear of losing their job. Extended paid parental leave is the
most critical of these, but proper workplace facilities in which women
can take adequate nursing breaks during the day are also important.

But such changes do not mean all women will choose to initiate
breastfeeding or to feed for extended periods of time. Health officials
and professionals who believe it would be unethical to support anything
but breastfeeding must seriously rethink the meaning of ethical and
professional behavior when it comes to caring for new mothers. It is
unethical for health professionals to use their considerable power and
authority to coerce (subtly or otherwise) competent and informed women
to make decisions that accord with the health professional’s view of
what is right.

It is even more unethical for such professionals to refuse to respect,
to withdraw support from, or seek to undermine women’s decisions they
deem \`\`wrong’’. Their moral and professional responsibility is to help
women understand the information women see as relevant to their
decision, and then to respect women’s capacity as competent informed
adults to make the best decision for them.

Ah, respect for female autonomy and moral agency. What could be more
simple?