---
assets: ~
categories: writings
excerpt: 'Who better than Anne Summers, a woman who lists among her achievements the
  best-selling book Damned Whores and God’s Police, advisor to former Prime Minister
  Keating and Officer of the Order of Australia for services to journalism and women,
  to write about the most pressing social problem of our time: the tragic imbalance
  between work and family responsibilities, and the devastating impact it is having
  on women’s well-being and the nation’s capacity to reproduce itself?'
link: ''
published: 2003-12-20
title: "Book Review - â\x80\x9CThe End of Equality: Work, Babies and Womenâ\x80\x99s
  Choices in 21st Century Australiaâ\x80\x9D"
---
By Anne Summers, Random House Australia, 2003. Paperback RRP $29.95

Who better than Anne Summers, a woman who lists among her
achievements the best-selling book Damned Whores and God’s Police,
advisor to former Prime Minister Keating and Officer of the Order of
Australia for services to journalism and women, to write about the most
pressing social problem of our time: the tragic imbalance between work
and family responsibilities, and the devastating impact it is having on
women’s well-being and the nation’s capacity to reproduce itself?

Heaven knows there has been no shortage of column inches dedicated to
the problem, as well as diligent hand-wringing and sympathetic clucking
noises from the Howard government. Yet while the problem seems to worsen
almost hourly, the Government does nothing. The reason for this, Summers
explains, is that the Government’s ideological preference for
traditional family arrangements - where Daddy brings home the bacon and
Mum cares for house and kids - precludes it from implementing policies
designed to reduce working women’s stress.

To the contrary, this bias leads the Government to blatantly
discriminate against families where both parents work by viciously
underfunding childcare, and implementing tax and benefit policies that
leave families with two earner $75 a week worse off on average than
those with only one. Summers argues that Australian women are often
unaware of such discriminatory policies because of the government’s
decision to either eliminate or enfeeble the agencies that in the past
not only would have publicly argued against them, bout kept ongoing tabs
on the impact they were having on women’s equality.

Close to forty years on the political stage has done nothing to taint or
muffle Summers’ activist indignation and thirsting for justice. She is
not afraid to name names in her expansive discussion of how both Labour
and Liberal politicians have failed women, as well as tossing bouquets
at the few men - Victorian QC Chris Maxwell comes in for special mention
- who use their power and influence to pursue justice for women. Given
that she was amongst the band of optimistic second-wave feminists who
confidently predicted that the mere presence of more women in Canberra
would make a difference, I particularly admired her willingness to
express disappointment in the 60 female members and senators who now
comprise over a quarter of pollies on the Federal benches for failing to
agitate on behalf of women. Emily’s List (the Labour women’s
organization that funds progressive female candidates) rightly comes in
for particular scrutiny for its inability - despite requiring all the
candidates it funds to demonstrate that they are pro-choice and
pro-childcare - to “galvanise” women to act on these commitments once
elected.

Throughout the book, Summers reveals herself to be a woman who doesn’t
just get mad, but gets active. She writes unselfconsciously (as if
everyone leaps into constructive action when their fundamental values
are challenged) about her outrage at Prime Minister Howard’s failure to
appoint a female Governor General, and his subsequent leaking to the
media that he desired to do so (leaving the clear impression that there
wasn’t a single woman in the country who was qualified). Grabbing a copy
of Who’s Who, it took Summers less than an hour to come up with 45 names
of women who were more than qualified for the post.

I must admit to being somewhat disappointed by the analysis Summers
provides of the causes of - and cures for - the work/family crunch and
resultant “fertility strike.” Unlike her discussion of violence and the
subterranean but highly politically sophisticated way in which the
Howard government has “disappeared” women from the political agenda -
where she clearly knows her way well around the factual and conceptual
terrain - she consistently fails to call on the intellectual apparatus
needed to make sense of the varied and complex things women want, do and
settle for when it comes to work and family. There is no doubt this
areas is complicated, with seeming contradictions at every turn. What to
make, for instance, of repeated surveys that show that young Australian
women are as committed as young men to the paid workforce (to remaining
“attached” to it and progressing up the career ladder), but others that
reveal substantial numbers of women claiming to “choose” total
withdrawal from the paid workforce or insecure part-time non-career
related jobs when they become mothers? “Constrained choice” and the
meaning of being a “non-chooser” in liberal democratic societies like
Australia are just some of the concepts found in thoughtful feminist
analysis of women’s work/life decisions that would have assisted Summers
to both explain such trends, and point the way ahead.

But if you’ve got a pulse and care about justice for women, you’re sure
to finish the book itching to do something - anything - to catapult
women’s quest for equality back on to the national agenda. Wisely,
Summers is prepared, dedicating her final chapter to a list of “ten ways
to change the world” and a directory of the relevant organizations and
individuals to contact to make your displeasure known. Since going to
press, she has even put this information up on her new website
(annesummers.com.au) where - with the aid of hyperlinks - it is even
easier to get started.

“Don’t get mad,” Summers advises, “get justice.” The rest she knows, is
up to us.