---
assets: ~
published: 2004-02-11
tags: ~
title: Misconceptions in the Blame Cycle
---
*Women must play and active role in protecting their sexual and
reproductive health*

Last week the Evening Standard reported the findings of a study linking
\
use of the Pill with infertility. The British study found that former
Pill users took twice as long to conceive than those who had used
condoms, with those overweight, over thirty-five or with a history of
irregular periods most likely to be affected. Nevertheless, less than a
week later Australian experts were hailing the release of a new Pill
that will allow women to reduce their periods to four times a year as
providing long overdue relief from the unnecessary “pain and
inconvenience” of a monthly bleed.

Women are likely to greet these latest findings, and the continued mixed
messages from the medical profession about how best to manage their
reproductive health, with the same feelings of confusion and outrage
that greeted last year’s belated findings that ingesting combination HRT
pills to prevent heart disease was not only a waste of time, but a clear
risk to overall health. Indeed, the anger of infertile women upon
learning this news is likely to be particularly keen, as the medical
profession has been swearing for years that the Pill has no negative
impact on future fertility.

But how justified are the explosions of female bewilderment and rage
that follow media reports of new medical information and, in their wake,
revised medical advice? Are medical scientists in general, and
prescribing doctors in particular, really to blame for getting it wrong
in the first place, or must women also accept some blame for the health
consequences of the drugs they choose to ingest?

The truth is somewhere in between.

On the one hand, there is frighteningly little public discussion of the
imposed and necessary limits of the testing procedures all new drugs
must undergo before being approved for use in Australia. Most patients,
for instance, would be shocked to discover that many of the drugs their
GPs prescribe have not been properly evaluated, either for safety or
effectiveness, for the condition and/or the type of patient for whom
they are prescribed. For instance, when doctors began advising all
menopausal women to take HRT (rather than the ones with acute menopausal
symptoms originally targeted by the drug) there was no good research
that it would reduce women’s risk of heart disease. That’s right, you
heard me. Absolutely none.

Before doctors prescribe for particular patients, they should ensure
that high quality evidence exists that the drug will be both safe and
effective for that particular patient. As respected medical journalist
Ray Moynihan has pointed out, problems often arise when doctors begin
prescribing drugs tested on, say, critically ill middle-aged white men,
to patients of all ages and sexes who present with far milder forms of
the condition. In addition, doctors need to pay attention to whether the
trials have adequately large sample sizes, are randomised and controlled
(the gold standard in medical research) and independently conducted
(rather than drug-company sponsored). Finally, they must be far more
upfront with patients about what isn’t known about a particular drug.
The impact of ongoing use is a big one here, simply because when a drug
is new, or being prescribed for a new condition, even if someone has had
the interest, foresight and financial capacity to study its long term
effects, the results won’t be known for years.

With most major medical journals available through on-line prescription,
there are few excuses for doctors not to provide patients with
up-to-the-minute information about the drugs they recommend.

But women, too, have a role to play in getting and staying well. Before
we swallow anything, particularly over months and years, we must ask our
doctors about what is, and is not, known about their risks and benefits
for a patient like us and what the quality is of the available evidence.
And, if such answers are not forthcoming, we must pursue them ourselves.
After all, it is our bodies and lives that will be affected - sometimes
critically and for life - if we fail to act. Mostly, we must assume that
in many instances when we swallow pharmaceuticals - especially in the
long term - we are part of a (usually unacknowledged) experiment into
their costs and benefits.

Perhaps if we kept this in mind, many of us would choose to take fewer
pills, and less of the ones we do. Instead, we might choose to take only
those pharmaceuticals we really need, only when less-risky treatment
alternatives aren’t available.