---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2004-05-13
tags: ~
title: A Pregnant Pause for Waiters and Watchers
---
The budget will encourage single working women to have children - but
more needs to be done

Has the budget left the single and childless out in the cold? Speaking
on our ABC this morning, Peter Costello said, “no.” According to the
treasurer, the fact that most childless singles will one day form
families means they will - and know they will - eventually be the
beneficiaries of handouts to new mothers and couples with kids.

Costello is right, and his claim points to an important and often
ignored cause of Australia’s plummeting fertility rate. According to my
research, one of the reasons some women hesitate about having children
is that they notice the tough time contemporary mothers are having
balancing work and family, and don’t want to share their pain. To
continue to behave as though government policy and workplace practices
only affect today’s parents, instead of the potential parents of
tomorrow, is both naive and dangerous.

Here’s how it works. A single women works alongside a number of women
with children, some single mums, others married with partners. Or she’s
got sisters, cousins or friends who have kids. During lunchbreaks, on
the phone, at family events, over dinner, these mothers tell their tales
of trying - and in modern-day Australia - failing to achieve their
desire to be good parents in happy marriages and, at the same time,
remain valued employees. Childless women listen to complaints mothers
make about the costs of childcare, and their worries about its impact on
their kids. They hear about the arguments mothers have with their blokes
over who does the drop-offs, washes the clothes, feeds the dog and takes
the day off when the child is sick. They guiltily observe, as childless
commentator Sian Prior admitted, mothers being “punished for not staying
back late in the office” and are aware that their own career advancement
comes at the expense of these “exhausted but determined” women.
Childless women hear and watch all this and they think: I want to
mother, but not like this. And they delay a little longer.

Childless men are also paying attention to what’s going on around them.
Despite the hype, growing numbers of them are committed, when they
finally do become fathers, to being “accessible” and intimately involved
in their child’s life. One survey found that many want to reduce their
hours when their kids are young. But in a country where growing numbers
of men are insecurely employed, maternity leave - little less paternity
leave - remains pie-in-the-sky, and where workers who do less than 40
(and in some industries 60) hour weeks miss out on promotion and pay
rises, they know these ambitions have little chance of being fulfilled.
So they too delay.

How big a helping hand does the budget lend parents and, consequently,
those considering becoming them? It’s a step in the right direction, but
unfortunately, still far less than what is needed to considerably
improve the capacity of parents to simultaneously fulfil their ambitions
to be both good parents and successful workers. Unfortunately, this
means it is insufficient to convince the deliberating and planning group
of potential parents - those I call the Waiters and Watchers - to say
“yes” to having kids.

What else will be necessary? Men are more likely to take paternity leave
if it is offered beyond the first year of a child’s life, and a recent
study from Brown University contends that in families where the father
shoulders half the burden of the “second shift,” mothers say “yes” to
more kids. This suggests that if parents were given enough money to fund
one year of leave at nearly-full pay which they could use until the
child went to school - the current situation in Norway - they would be
able to divide the childcare burden between them, while each retained a
firm foothold in the workplace. This sort of package would give parents
the option of totally avoiding paid care in the first few years of the
child’s life if this was their preference, or alternatively combining
parental and paid childcare across a larger number of years. Of course,
for such a plan to work, high quality childcare needs to be the norm and
must become affordable which, at around $50 per day per child, it not
now the case.

This should, as long as it was coupled with changed social attitudes
about what “good” mothers and fathers do, new workplace attitudes about
the “seriousness” of part-time workers, and government guarantees to
parents that their job, or one at the same level and wages, will be
waiting for them when they return, would decrease the economic and
social costs currently born by those raising the next generation.

And, as a result, should lead many of those currently considering
parenthood to finally take the plunge.