---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2004-07-27
title: No Sister, Feminism is Not About Choice
---
*Airing a dream is to criticise and negate the opposing vision*

Ah, the good old F-word. For a while, things were looking grim. All that
talk about irrelevance, betrayal of the young, even death. No one but
the humourless hirsute holed up in the hallowed halls of
higher-education had a good word to say about her.

Now our dear old F-word is back, though the revolutionary being returned
to us as a topic of decent conversation is not the gal we knew. She’s a
kindler, gentler revolutionary with fewer enemies than a nun. She’s the
New Feminism, a social movement that no longer causes discomfort or
division by identifying female oppression or fighting to change the way
the world is organised. The New Feminism speaks only in muted tones
about how all women’s “choices” must be respected.

The problem with New Feminism is that social movements must actually
stand for something. Barracking for one vision of the good is to be
opposed to its opposite. For something to be right, fair or good,
something else must (at least in theory and arguably in practice) be
wrong, unfair or bad. Second wave feminists weren’t backwards about
coming forward with their views that attitudes and practices when it
came to paid work and the care of children discriminated and oppressed
women and were therefore wrong. It was on the basis of these unambiguous
moral assertions that their demands for change were founded. It was also
on this basis that opposition formed amongst those who disagreed with
feminist descriptions of the problem, the movement’s preferred
solutions, or both.

Choice, as the forgoing should make clear, didn’t enter it. This is not
to say that choice is not a legitimate part of what feminism is about in
some instances. In particular, when it’s possible for everyone to have
it regardless of their education level or financial resources, and when
making one choice available to one person doesn’t denigrate or undermine
the legitimacy of the choices made another. The freedom to choose
abortion is a good example. It can be argued for without implying that
women who go forward with an unplanned pregnancy, or choose motherhood
at any other point in their lives, are doing the wrong thing.

Would that it were always so easy. Feminists also argued that women and
men should share the work of earning and of caring. They have claimed
that social attitudes, policies and practices that make it hard for
women to undertake paid work and for men to care are oppressive, and
ought to be changed. Note such a claim is not about preference. It’s
doesn’t say “I don’t like it, so you should change it.” Rather it is an
assertion that the way we currently do things is morally wrong, and that
doing the right thing requires us to change.

What kinds of reasons did feminists give in support of their claim that
change was required? They said it was only fair that women have the same
educational and job opportunities as men, and be paid the same for the
same work. They also claimed that children were harmed by men’s absence
from the home (a concern now shared by the men’s movement).

Such claims were never morally innocuous nor, consequently, reducible to
matters of “choice.” If discrimination against women was unjust, than
those who colluded or supported such discrimination were guilty of
immoral behaviour. If children suffered as a consequence of the way
labour was organised, than everyone who supported such arrangements -
from society, to employers, to parents who lived that way when they had
the ability to do otherwise - stood condemned. “Choice” never entered
it.

The old F-word was also fond of exposing the classist nature of choice.
It was the feminists that everyone loved-to-hate who pointed out that
under-the-garden-tree ponderings of the “should I return to work, or
should I stay at home?” variety were available only to sisters whose
husbands were loaded. For the rest of us (as well as for the vast
majority of fathers who not only lack a decently-paid spouse but access
to even the minimal parental-leave and part-time work options enjoyed by
some mothers) the “choice” is academic, given the causal pairing of the
stay-at-home option with the go-to-the-poorhouse one. Seen in this
light, it’s clear that respect for individual choice offers few answers
to most women and men struggling to solve the work/life crisis.

We’d all like to get along famously and, on a personal level, we can. At
the risk of recycling the oldest cliché in the book, one of my best
friends is a stay-at-home mum. With the exception of the time we tried
to discuss the White Wings advert (the one in which a school-girl
extolling her mother’s philosophy of home-backing everything is told by
her friend that her own mother doesn’t do that because she’s “got a
life.”), there’s never been a cross word between us. Politically,
however, such internecine peace - between conservative and revolutionary
women; between the unselfconsciously wealthy and the rest - is
impossible. Impossible, that is, without real feminists neutering our
vision of a better world for women so radically that it renders us
little more, and little better, than patriarchs without balls.

Change requires a moral vision of the world as it should be; a vision
that is, by definition, exclusionary. To state one’s dreams is to
implicitly criticise and negate the opposing vision of others.

Ah politics, it’s a bitch.