---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2004-07-12
title: Abortion Critics Deny the Complexity of Choice
---
British filmmaker Julia’s Black’s documentary My Foetus won’t screen in
Australia until August 8, but debate has already begun about whether the
film should be censored, and the impact it will have on political debate
about abortion.

The film, made while Black was pregnant with her first child,
reconsiders an abortion she had over a decade earlier. It shows a
four-week pregnant woman having a suction termination, as well as foetal
remains at 10, 11 and 21 weeks gestation. The filmmaker claims, in an
article in The Observer, to present both sides of the “reality” of
abortion: balancing what she describes as “shocking, repulsive, and
confrontational” images of aborted foetuses with the circumstances and
emotions of the unhappily pregnant women forced to choose.

There is no question in my mind that My Foetus should be screened. For
one, it is an unprecedented opportunity for the public to see
foetal-remains accompanied by accurate captions and commentary. For too
long, the anti-choice movement has mislabelled images of older fetuses
as those of 14 weeks gestational age or younger (not coincidentally, the
period when approximately 95 per cent of abortions take place). For too
long, the anti-choice movement has used voice-overs in propaganda films
such as The Silent Scream (in which the ultrasonographic images used are
so fuzzy and unclear as to be unrecognisable without narrative
direction) to imply women who abort are heartless and cruel.

More importantly, pro-choice advocates have long seen the foetus as the
property of the other side: accepting anti-choice claims that if the
fetus is admitted to be both human and alive, abortion must be
acknowledged as morally wrong and made illegal - again.

Yet, as fetal imagery becomes increasingly ubiquitous (who amongst us
hasn’t seen an ultrasound image or an anti-choice billboard?), this
position has become increasingly politically risky. Black is right to
feel that the pro-choice movement must reclaim the foetus, though I
disagree with her assertion that the reason the movement has shied away
in the past is the “repulsiveness” of foetal remains.

No, the real problem with focusing on the fetus is that it leaves women
- literally - out of the picture. A typical fetal image is of a
balled-up cosmonaut in a circular, disembodied capsule. It is rare for
the line surrounding the fetus to even gesture at its reality as a
woman’s womb, or to the geographical relationship of the capsule to the
rest of the woman’s body (is she sitting or standing? In which direction
are her feet and face?)

More importantly than her body, a focus on the fetus leaves the woman’s
life out of the picture: her partnership status; her ability to parent
well; her plans and ambitions for the future. Yet it precisely this
context, and the way the woman approaches and makes her decision, that
makes her choice comprehensible, and provides its moral texture and
meaning.

The anti-choice movement knows this. That is why the “hard cases” -
unwanted pregnancies resulting from incest and rape, or those that
threaten a woman’s life - split the movement in two. Because while such
foetuses are as alive and human as any other, most refuse to condemn
women who abort in such circumstances. Better than any other, these
cases show it is our judgements about women’s motives and intentions
that determine our moral evaluation of her particular abortion. And
experience shows such judgements to be harsher for strangers, and kinder
for friends. Abortion clinic staff repeatedly report doing terminations
for anti-choice protesters, only to find them - weeks later - on the
picket lines again.

As Black’s film testifies, feeling bad about abortion (or, more
precisely, feeling bad about finding oneself in the position of having
to face the decision at all) is testament that our moral sensibilities
are finely tuned, not that abortion is wrong. Most people who choose
divorce, particularly those with children, feel less than exultant about
having to make that decision; yet few believe this proves the choice was
wrong, or should be legally denied.

Black rarely spoke of her long-ago abortion. Few of the one in three
women who will have an abortion in their lifetime do. She says she wants
her film to change that, and the laws that in both the UK and many
states in Australia that hand doctors ultimate control over whether a
woman can get an abortion; requiring women “to plead insanity to end an
unwanted pregnancy.”

The truth is no one knows what the reaction of the Australian public
will be to the film. But there is no reason why, if Black has done her
work well - ensuring both women and foetuses remain in the frame - than
supporters of abortion rights have anything to fear. It is a anti-choice
myth that women don’t really know what they are doing when they
terminate, and that seeing foetal remains will reveal some previously
unrealised “truth” about the procedure.

The morality of abortion is, and will always be, far more complicated
than that.