---
assets: ~
published: 2004-03-04
tags: ~
title: Much Remains Confused about Men, Women, Sex and Power
---
Here, there, women crying “rape” are everywhere. I worry about the
sudden onslaught of rape charges. Of course, I support a woman’s right
to raise her grievances publicly and have them addressed in a legitimate
forum, but I worry that others might not. The men being named are
sporting heroes, and it wasn’t all that long ago that author Helen
Garner questioned the legitimacy of young women bringing charges of
sexual assault, both because of serious damage the resulting publicity
had on the man’s reputation, and because she felt it was the job of
young women to take responsibility for the effect their sexuality had on
the opposite sex.

For those feeling cynical about the sudden onslaught of allegations, it
is critical to understand that “date-rape” charges come in waves for
good reason. Unless they have been violated by a bush-leaping,
balaclava-clad stranger, women tend to doubt themselves when it comes to
labelling a disturbing, violative or even abusive sexual encounter as
assault. Was it really rape, they wonder, if I flirted with the guy
earlier than evening, was drinking, had a short skirt on, consented to
all forms of petting short of intercourse?

Even if they are savvy enough to know that no one - no matter what she
said, wore or did - asks to be raped, they may worry others will
disbelieve their story, or claim that they did. This is where other
women speaking out is critical. When others tell their story and have
their complaints taken seriously, those keeping silent gain the courage
to speak, too.

The media, police, and the clubs deserve credit, in other words (with
the exception of St Kilda, who having spoken only to the two accused
have now publicly declared themselves 100% behind their “boys”) for
responding appropriately to the women’s charges, and therefore
encouraging other women to emerge from the shadows.

But the avalanche of accusations has another cause too, one which I
think testifies to the success of feminism, and bodes well for gender
relations in the future. Many of the women making charges against
players are from Generation X and even Y - young women in their twenties
and thirties - who see as their birthright to either receive respect
from the opposite sex, or to demand it. These confident, assertive women
have come of age with the knowledge that no man has the right to use
either his advantage in strength or power to disadvantage her; either in
the bedroom or the office. When men do abuse either, they see little
problem in bringing them to account.

It is hard to see how such forthright attitudes from young women, if
widespread and sustained enough, will not fundamentally alter the
behaviour of young men. After all, the whole reason gender relations are
so fraught is that men and women want and need each other: they want and
need each other in bed, to build the long-term intimate relationships so
fundamental to their emotional well-being, and to form and raise
families. This means that when one gender change the rules, the other -
no matter how much they moan and complain - has little choice but to
adjust their ways. If women won’t sleep with or marry men until they are
treated with respect on all relevant turfs, in other words, then men
will start seeing their role in the attainment of equality for women as
a bread and butter issue.

Renegotiated power relations between the sexes are to be welcomed, to a
point. While Australians rightly don’t want to wind up where many
American college men felt they were during the 1990s - needing a signed
consent form before they could safely have sex with a woman - we do want
all sexual engagements to be conducted with an awareness not only of the
exciting and unpredictable frisson of Eros, but of the potential that
unequal power and intoxication has for causing misunderstanding, and the
importance of mutual respect, open communication and excellent listening
skills.

When men understand that women who bring their stories of abuse into the
open will be heard, it will go a long way to redress the power imbalance
in sexual encounters. This will particularly be the case in
relationships between high profile athletes and their fans, that are so
often the cause of trouble.