---
assets: ~
excerpt: Most people are familiar with at least some of Bob Ellis’s long and impressive
  resume. The author of seventeen books, including the bestselling Goodbye Jerusalem,
  Goodbye Babylon and First Abolish the Customer, he’s also written and directed features
  and documentaries including The Notradamus Kid and Bastards from the Bush. He’s
  won or been nominated for numerous honours, including the Premier’s Literary Award.
link: ''
published: 2004-11-06
tag: writings
title: Book Review - Night Thoughts in a Time of War - Bob Ellis
---
Night Thoughts in a Time of War by Bob Ellis, Viking, 2004.

Most people are familiar with at least some of Bob Ellis’s long
and impressive resume. The author of seventeen books, including the
bestselling Goodbye Jerusalem, Goodbye Babylon and First Abolish the
Customer, he’s also written and directed features and documentaries
including The Notradamus Kid and Bastards from the Bush. He’s won or
been nominated for numerous honours, including the Premier’s Literary
Award.

Ellis is also a Labour speechwriter and quintessential leftie insider.
These days he works for Bob Carr, gets medical referrals from SA Premier
Mike Rann, and dines with Natasha (“Tash”) Stott-Despoja and her
(extravagantly wanting, to Ellis’s mind) fiancé, Ian. He has regular
encounters with political big-wigs who impress him with their, “reason
and skill” (Kevin Rudd), the “sedate” manner in which they move
“securely into history” (Whitlam and Graham Freudenberg) or their “rose
lips” and “dreamy girlish beauty” (Maxine McKew and Stott-Despoja). In
return, they praise him for getting things “as usual, dead right” (Susie
Annus), for being “old-fashioned, but in a very, very nice way” (fellow
speechwriter Carol Green) and by laughing hysterically at his political
wit (Carr).

Some may find such windows into the personal relationships, intimate
thoughts and general comings and goings of contemporary power-brokers
offers welcome relief from the recycled press releases and 20-second
grabs that now substitutes for current affairs reporting in this
country. Others may see it as nothing more than name-dropping from an
aging man preoccupied with his own death and anxious about his own place
- and the place of the ideas he’s championed all his life - in history.

Make no mistake about it, Ellis is a good guy. He feels for the needy
and is contemptuous of the greedy, and never fails to use his influence
to ease the suffering of the most forgotten and abused in Australian
society. He gave hospitality to Ali Bakhtiyari, the man whose sons fled
from detention but were refused refuge at the UK Consulate, and vainly
worked his contacts to prevent the children being shipped back to
Woomera.

There is also evidence, on numerous occasions, of a fine turn of phrase.
I love Ellis’s description of taking his two dogs “for a whiffle on the
beach among the seaweed and the gulls and a town meeting of other
yelping dogs near the big tree”. With a few deft phrases, his
description of witnessing an IRA bombing in London back in the 1970s,
puts us right there.

Yet death confronts us on every page. Ellis admires his mother’s fight
against her “final descent” and rages against the dying of his own
personal light. He repeatedly laments the under-appreciation of the
contributions to politics and culture of dead white men he knew
personally or admired from history (does he fear a similar fate?), and
the denial of legitimacy to the varied excuses such men had for failing
to live up to expectations (as he fears he has?).

For those disinterested in this theme, the text offers little refuge.
While those who already share Ellis’s world view may take comfort in his
passionate rehearsal of various left-wing lines (he’s anti-Iraq war,
anti-Israel, anti-Bush, and pro asylum-seekers), those needing sustained
and logical argument to be persuaded of the wisdom of Ellis’s assertions
will be disappointed. His attitude seems to be that you’re either with
him or a’gin him: if it’s the former you need no persuasion, while those
in the latter camp will never be convinced, anyway. As a consequence,
what’s on offer is never weightier than a moment-by-moment recounting of
recent events surrounding the war in Iraq, accompanied by Ellis’s
evaluation of whether any particular political action or attempt at spin
will “play”.

Which leads me to my final reservation about Night Thoughts and all
books of it’s genre (Noam Chomky’s 9/11, Gore Vidal’s Perpetual War for
Perpetual Peace): volumes that purport to offer a comprehensive analysis
of a recent event by “a great thinker of our time”. If journalism is the
first draft of history, what exactly are such books? They claim to
provide more than the fact-reporting and superficial analysis
necessarily characteristic of writing forced to conform to the 24-hour
news cycle, yet starved of both distance from the event and the
perspective offered by time, their significance can be doubted. While
they are almost certainly catering to a book-buying market desperate to
make sense of our rapidly changing world, I remain sceptical - both in
theory and from experience- about their capacity to deliver.

A friend currently enjoying Night Thoughts says such criticism misses
the point. “Ellis is not trying to say anything particularly new or
insightful. You read it because something big - like the war in Iraq -
happens and you think to yourself, ‘Now I wonder what a bloke like Ellis
would think about that?’”.