---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2005-05-21
title: Book Review - Wonder Woman
---
By Virginia Haussegger, Allen & Unwin, $26.95

It’s hard to read Virginia Haussegger, or to listen to her on radio - as
she has been in the last week, plugging Wonder Woman - and not find
yourself liking her. In particular, I admire her honesty. Since 2002,
when she threw open the doors on her reproductive journey and its
unwanted destination, Haussegger has never been anything less than
forthright about the pain she feels over finding herself unintentionally
childless.

Haussegger’s ongoing personal journey both structures and animates
Wonder Woman. In it, Haussegger tries to make sense of the “creeping
non-choices” that led to the moment in the doctor’s surgery where she
was briskly told she’d left her run to motherhood too late. The book
also represents the author’s working through of her grief about missing
out on motherhood, and her efforts to reconstruct a new imagined future,
and identity, for herself as a woman without children.

Haussegger writes movingly of the events leading up to the opinion piece
that shook the world (then-Opinion editor Paul Austin nominated it as
the piece published in recent years that generated the most response),
and about the distress that can be found in unexpected places when
life-long habits, like the carting of carefully labelled boxes full of
journals and photos from city to city, are recognised as having been
geared towards children who aren’t to be. Writes Haussegger:

“When I was very young I was entranced by the few old photos we had of
my mother and father when they were young…I desperately wanted to know
what my mother was like when she was little…The fading photos gave some
clues, as did the precious jewellery box my mother kept hidden
away…Every piece held a story, every story I would demand to hear over
and over again…Now at forty years old, I’ve built up a box of treasures
of my own. I just don’t know who to show them to”.

I cried at this line, which comes near the book’s end. The cleanness of
the emotion a welcome relief from the turbulent confusion engendered by
the preceding (and subsequent, as it turned out) text. Because while
Haussegger it a wonderful raconteur, and demonstrates a clear gift for
exploring emotions - her own and, through interview, those of others -
she desperately lacks any capacity to think her way out of the complex
problems she explores in Wonder Woman. Despite having read most seminal
and popular feminist texts - from the Second Sex to the Female Eunich to
Backlash - she clearly failed to absorb their central and most important
message: that the personal is political. And without this understanding,
or some structural framework to make sense of her experience and those
of other women in terms other than those proffered by liberal
individualism, Haussegger lacks the tools to extricate herself from the
circular path of self-blame and DIY solutions that have characterised
her journey, and to cut a clear path forward for her female readers.

This is not to say that she does not, on rare occasions, allude to such
politics and their potential for women’s liberation. Having begun the
book with her familiar refrain that it’s “high time to re-think
feminism’s messages and the \`have it all’ mantra that’s been thumped
into the brains and parlance of post-feminist women”, Haussegger then
tentatively contradicts the implications of this claim - that feminism
needs a less ambitious message - with a one-line assertion that
“encourag[ing] young women to lessen their expectations, rather than
raise them by demanding more equity and support, is doomed”.

But this theme quickly drops away, only to be briefly and somewhat
incoherently resurrected in the book’s last few pages (I’m afraid I have
no idea what the approvingly quoted Nicola Roxon means when she asserts
that contemporary feminists must fight “to be ourselves”).

And so we are left with the bizarre hypothesis that the real problem
facing contemporary women is that feminists didn’t tell them they
couldn’t have it all, rather than the fact that even in post-feminist
times, they still can’t.

The job of articulating this obvious truth was left to Shadow Health
Minister Julia Gillard who launched the book at the National Press Club
early this month. Gillard spoke eloquently of the need to move “beyond
the lament” and to “go forward, to carve out more change and to do what
we need to do now so [that the life of girls] is more full of real
choice than that of today’s woman.”

You said it, sister. The question is: why didn’t Haussegger?