---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2005-11-26
tag: writings
title: Paternity Fraud or Paternal Discrepancy?
---
“Paternity Fraud” implies deceptive women cuckholding men into believing
children are biologically theirs. But the truth is more complex, and
more human.

While the DNA paternity test has been around since the early 1980s, it
was not until the mid–1990s that the moral panic about what father’s
rights activists call “paternity fraud” took flight in Australia.
Instigated by the Child Support (Assessment) Act of 1989, the Act
effectively transformed the age-old definition of a father: from the man
married to a child’s biological mother, to the man whose sperm caused
the child to be conceived. Designed to compel men to take fiscal
responsibility for the fruit of their loins, the new law was lauded by
politicians as a boon to both women and children.

Overnight, the new law changed the world for separated and divorced men.
While previous support arrangements had largely left such men in control
of decisions about whether and to what extent they would provide
financial support for the children of failed relationships ~~60% to 70%
found it easy to evade court-ordered maintenance and pay nothing~~ the
new act used set formulas to assign child support liabilities that could
be automatically deducted from a man’s salary or from his bank account.

The only recourse for men hoping to escape what one commentator
sympathetic to the Father’s Rights cause recently referred to as the
“clutches” of the Child Support Agency is to disprove biological
paternity. So, perhaps not surprisingly, the Act’s passage saw DNA labs
bloom across the commercial landscape like desert flowers, marketing
paternal anxiety to men and promising “peace of mind” from between $150
to $825 (if you want the results to stand up in court). By early 2000,
Father’s Rights Groups were insisting on the basis of discredited or
even non-existent data sets that between 10 to 30% of Australian
children were being parented by men who were not the biological father,
and viciously attacking academics - like Swinburne’s Professor Michael
Gilding - who tried to set the record straight (Gilding’s published
results showing the Australian rate is likely to be between 1 and 3%).

The Australian face of paternity fraud is Melbourne man Liam Magill. In
2002, Magill’s ex-wife Meredith was ordered to pay him $70,000 for
general damages and the economic loss he suffered as a consequence of
her false declaration that he was, as one newspaper report put it, the
biological father of “her lover’s children”. The case continues to fight
its way through the courts, with the High Court of Australia last week
granting Mr Magill leave to contest the Victorian Supreme Court’s
reversal of his victory and continue his case for compensation. But,
however the highest court in the land ultimately rules, Magill’s
predicament - and the anxieties of fathers over legally intertwined
questions of biological paternity and fiscal responsibility - have had a
profound impact on government policy. In June this year, the
Attorney-General Philip Ruddock amended the Family Law Act to make it
easier for men to reclaim child maintenance or property transferred to a
child that DNA testing reveals isn’t really “theirs”. Around the same
time, the Government took delivery of what has become known as the
Parkinson report which recommends that men disputing biological
paternity be allowed to suspend child support payments for as long as it
takes to resolve the issue.

It is men - or what President of the Australian Law Reform Commission
Professor David Weisbrot calls “putative” and “angry dads’ - that
dominate debates about child support and paternity fraud. While their
bitter denunciations of women who”cheat and lie" echo through
cyber-space, in real life such men contribute the bulk of submissions to
the ALRC’s recent inquiry into the privacy of genetic information and,
through their endless complaints to local MPs, instigate inquires like
the 2003 one into child custody arrangements that ultimately led to the
Parkinson report. The voices of children and women are rarely heard.
Indeed, even in the wake of her victory in the Victorian Supreme Court,
Meredith Magill refused to grant interviews to any of the assembled
reporters.

The work of Dr Lyn Turney, a researcher at Swinburne, suggests that this
is not surprising. Turney’s groundbreaking research on women who keep
“paternity secrets,” which appeared in the most recent issue of the
Journal of Family Studies, argues that the panic surrounding paternity
fraud paints mothers as the central “moral threat” to social stability.
Charged as sexual deviants for the dual “crimes” of infidelity and
sluttishly having more than one partner - while posing in the community
as “good” wives and mothers - the behaviour of such women is depicted as
morally indefensible. Says Turney: “They encapsulate not only female
sexuality out of control but also a view of women as predatory,
deceptive, and instrumental”. No wonder they don’t want to stick their
heads above the parapet.

But Turney wanted to know more. In particular, what led women to have
and to keep “paternity secrets”? Her results, the outcome of interviews
with 15 Australian women, are testament to the stubborn opacity of
conception, the complexity of human relationships and the way in which
both shame and violence shape women’s sexual and reproductive lives.

As it turns out, Kathleen Donnelly, the past girlfriend of Health
Minister Tony Abbott who publicly - and mistakenly - declared him the
father of their long-ago adopted son, is not the only Australian woman
to be confused about the genetic paternity of her offspring. In Turney’s
sample, a number of women admitted to uncertainty about which man was
the genetic father of their child.

But few of these women’s stories conformed to the “paternity fraud”
stereotype of faithless wives with regular lovers. Instead, the women
Turney interviewed told of sexual relationships that “overlapped” or
happened “in quick succession,” as well as “one-off” encounters with
friends, acquaintance and old-flames that usually didn’t involve either
infidelity or deception because the women were either unattached or only
“minimally attached” to a dying, old or embryonic relationship at the
time. One woman, for example, had unplanned sex with a long-time friend:
her first encounter after the death of her husband a year earlier.
Several days later, she met a new man who became her regular partner.
Another woman told of a single sexual liaison with an old flame while
single and trying to conceive a child with a known-donor. Both of these
women, as well as others to whom Turney spoke, had dismissed the
reproductive potential of these one-off encounters because they wanted
to believe that their chosen or permanent partner - the one with whom
they were having regular unprotected sex - was the genetic father. It
was only when the baby bore a similarity to the biological father at
birth, or the woman later happened upon a childhood photograph of the
biological father, that the connection was made and the biological
realities of the situation accepted.

The threat of sexual violence or shaming also explains a number of cases
of “paternity fraud”. Several women, some of whom confessed
stomach-turning tales of rape and abuse, withheld doubts about their
child’s paternity for fear of their partners’ response. One woman told
of being raped by a family friend and, believing herself to be at fault
because she “trusted him”, never told anyone of the assault or her
subsequent doubts about paternity.

Turney also cites several instances where older domineering husbands
organized sexual liaisons - in the context of an “open marriage” and
plenty of drugs and alcohol - in which their wives participated. When
the women subsequently raised questions about the paternity of resulting
children, the husbands “muted” the discussion by “highlighting the
women’s…sexual transgressions” and threatening them with public
disclosure. Such men “drew upon the moral panic,” in other words, to
stop the woman revealing the secret about the child’s paternity not to
the social father - who knew exactly what was going on - but to society
at large. Only when the relationship broke down, and the question of
support payments arose, did the men question the child’s biological
paternity.

Abortion was considered by several women unsure about which man caused
their pregnancy, but the men in their lives were not always supportive.
The Catholic step-father of a 16 year-old told her he would never speak
to her again if she had an abortion, while a GP to whom another woman
confessed her lack of paternity certainty counselled her to “go ahead
with the pregnancy and see what happens”. In one instance, the
suggestion of abortion triggered an angry response from the woman’s
partner because she was threatening to “kill [a] baby that was probably
his”.

The knowledge that some “defrauded” dads have about women’s paternity
“secrets’ is perhaps the most important - and surprising - of Turney’s
findings. From the wife-swapping husband, to the abortion-opposing
partner, to the spouse who knew his wife had conceived during a short
break in their relationship yet nonetheless chose to sign the birth
registration papers and act in the role of the child’s father, Turney
exposes a range of scenarios where the word”fraud" poorly describe what
the men involved describe as the problem they face, if indeed they
define their situation as problematic at all. For one man, the issue was
that his partner was unfaithful, not that the resulting child wasn’t
biologically “his”. However, in explaining his refusal to have a
paternity test, the ex-partner of another woman said that while he was
“over the fact the [she had] slept with some else,” he hadn’t come to
terms with the potential genetic consequences of her actions.

Indeed, Turney’s revelation that some men know there are doubts about
their children’s genetic lineage or even that their children are
definitely not biologically “theirs” bolsters suggestions - rife in the
academic literature - that relationship breakdown is an important
trigger to men’s (and consequently society’s) reworking of paternity
“secrets” into the moral crime of paternity “fraud.” It also hints at
the unsavory possibility, vehemently rejected by Father’s Rights groups,
that at least some men are motivated to test - in the wake of marital
breakdown - to escape child support liabilities.

The take home message of Turney’s research is simple, yet consistently
overlooked in debates about paternity fraud. That human values, motives
and relationships come in a myriad of complex - even convoluted - forms.
“Oh, what a tangled web we weave”, I wanted to sigh as each woman’s tale
- with its coercion and choice, misunderstanding and deception, care and
indifference - unfolded. I also found Turney’s work suggestive of a
number of ways the problem of paternity fraud could be understood, and
fixed.

What is clear is that it is a nonsense to brand all instances in which
men receive paternity test results showing they are not a child’s
biological father as cases of “paternity fraud”. As Turney’s research
shows, such results may - or may not - be telling the man something he
didn’t know already. Fraud implies deceit and if men know there is doubt
about a child’s genetic paternity or are sure a child is not their
biological progeny - and have supported the pregnancy continuing (for
instance, by opposing an abortion) - then it is simply incorrect to
claim that they have duped either about their partner’s fidelity or into
accepting legal responsibility for the child.

By definition, a victim of fraud is someone who has been injured, or at
least disadvantaged. To be defrauded is to be cheated of something that
is rightfully yours. Indeed, the claim that “real” Dads are genetic
ones, and therefore that men who discover they are not the progenitor of
the child they are parenting have been cheated of fatherhood, is at the
heart of Father’s Rights Groups claims about the wrongs suffered by
victims of paternity fraud. Yet, research evidence, not to mention the
decisions of millions of men to adopt children or conceive them using
donor sperm, suggest that many men see the essence of fatherhood as
parenting, not sperm-donation. For them, the “real” father is the one
who is “there” not at the time of conception, but for the joys and hard
work of parenting.

Of course, many - if not most - men want to be both the genetic and the
social father of their child. Were this not the case, chastity belts
would never have been invented, nor the debilitating laws and attitudes
that until recently condemned “unwed mothers” and their “bastard”
children to legal and social non-personhood. When women keep paternity
secrets, they deprive men of the knowledge that would instigate an
exploration of their values regarding social and genetic fatherhood, and
the chance to make partnering and parenting choices based on those
values. Paternity secrets deprive men of the chance to say “thanks but
no thanks” to an offer of social, but not biological, fatherhood.

All this cashes out to a definition of the problem that focuses on the
abuse of trust caused by infidelity and subsequent deception about the
infidelity, and the consequent denial to men of the chance to make
informed decisions about partnering and parenting. Such a definition
does not make the parenting of an unrelated child a quandary in and of
itself, but only one in the context of a lack of female honesty and
informed decision-making by the man. The difficulty is not the return of
DNA results that show a social father is not a biological one, but the
return of such results to a man who did not know there was any doubt
about his partner’s sexual fidelity and his genetic paternity. The
trouble is the discrepancy between what men believe is the case about
their partner’s fidelity and genetic paternity, and the reality. The
problem isn’t paternity fraud. The problem is paternal discrepancy.

What all this should make clear is that the current child support
payment system, which assigns payment obligations on the basis of
biological paternity, not parenting commitment, is tragically flawed.
Regardless of whether or not he suspected, knew or had no idea that the
child he was parenting was genetically unrelated, and notwithstanding
however culpable his female partner’s behavior was in creating that
situation, the law needs to recognize and affirm men’s value to children
as parents - and people - not sperm donors. Playing the biological card
not only undercuts research findings that affirm the importance to
children of having an active male parent in their lives, but lends
support to the insulting claim made by a sperm donor interviewed on Four
Corners last month that he, not the man who invested 20 years of time
and love, was his daughter’s “real” father.

Ditto for recent suggestions that DNA paternity testing ought to be made
compulsory at birth. Turney’s research makes it easy to imagine the man
who suspects or even knows that his new bundle of joy is not a
biological relation compelled to face a doctor or nurse delivering the
“negative” results of a mandatory paternity test. How likely is such a
man to admit to knowing and not caring about the sexual and biological
realities surrounding his child’s conception if he feels this will brand
him as cuckold and a mug? Better, he may feel, to beat his chest, cry
foul and walk out on his wife and new baby.

Of course, rejecting mandatory paternity testing at birth does not mean
that men should not be assisted to accept the obligations of fatherhood
in a more informed way. Upon the birth of a child, men ought to be given
the opportunity to give one-time-only non-rescindable consent to their
acceptance of the rights and responsibilities of fatherhood. If they
feel unable to sign on the dotted line without conclusive proof that
they are the biological progenitor, they should be offered a DNA test
free of charge.

However, once a man does formally accept social and legal responsibility
for a child - either with knowledge of their genetic paternity or in the
face of a fully informed waiver of that knowledge - their status as the
child’s legal father should rightly be set in stone. No DNA skeletons
rattling out of the cupboards at a later date should impact on what they
legally owe their child, or hopefully, how they feel about the kid who
calls him Dad.

Dr Leslie Cannold is a bioethicist at the University of Melbourne’s
Centre for Applied Philosophy and Public Ethics who regularly researches
and writes about reproductive choice. Dr Lyn Turney’s research is
ongoing. Men and women with experiences of paternity testing or
paternity uncertainty interested in participating can dial freecall 1800
007 166 for more information.