---
assets: ~
published: 2005-09-08
tags: ~
title: "Beslanâ\x80\x99s Terrorists Show the Dark Side of Human Emotions"
---
*Damaged children grow up to believe that only violence can change*

Like most Australians I have been devastated by the unfolding tragedy in
Russia. Or perhaps even more so. I have school age children, and like
many parents, was overwhelmed with pity for those pacing helpless and
unknowing outside the mined school building: Were their children
thirsty? Hurt? Dead? I was similarly undone by the Jaiden Leskie case
several years ago: Jaiden was the age of my youngest son when he
disappeared.

My fretfulness during the Beslan siege, and my mournful grief for the
parents as they wail and bury their dead, is empathy: the emotion
provoked in normal people by the suffering of others. It is the quality
psychopaths and serial killers lack and, experts increasingly believe,
one that must be nurtured during a child’s early years to develop
properly. Chronic poverty, political powerlessness and social
indifference: these are the social conditions that undermine the ability
of parents to raise adults with the capacity to feel the pain of others,
and to live peacefully in society as one of us. These same conditions
foster the belief amongst such damaged children that violence is the
only salve for their pent-up anger and frustration, and the only route
to change.

There can be no forgiveness of what the Beslan terrorists did to the
children and parents of that town. Nor does there need to be. They have
violated the most sacred responsibility of adults to children - to
protect them and offer them a future - and in doing so have made them,
indeed all of us, feel like failures. Justice, rough or otherwise, is
more than they deserve.

But how best to honour the dead and the children who survived? How do we
make it up to them? Their parents will do the small things: hold them
when they cry, soothe their restless sleep. Mother Russia is already
talking tough about beefed-up security, leading some to fear a return to
Soviet-style oppression.

Will this make the children feel safe? Perhaps, but perhaps not - it’s
never held much water with my kids. Even a ten-year old understands it
only takes one terrorist to slip through the net for tragedy to occur.

It’s normal, understandable and entirely forgivable for individuals and
societies who’ve suffered in Beslan, after Bali and on 9/11 to want
retribution. But more for practical reasons than moral ones, an eye for
an eye will never be the answer. In the past many Irish terrorists, and
Palestinian ones today, were the terrorized children of yesterday,
retaliating against someone - anyone - for the sudden and traumatic
death of a loved one that sometimes took place before their eyes. It is
said the claimed organiser of the Beslan siege lost 11 family members in
a Russian assault on Chechnya. And so it goes. In the end, an eye for an
eye just leaves blind, toothless and scared to death.

Giving our children a future demands we adults do the hardest thing
there is: insist on seeing the terrorists as human. Yes, it’s easier to
dismiss them as “animals” and [fanatics]() inexplicably severed from
normal human emotions and aspirations; monsters at birth who were never
like us. But until we recognise terrorists as the sharp-edge of icebergs
of social deprivation and despair, their distorted humanity sourced in
some real-world trauma that could have been different and could still
change, it is we who lose.

This is no Christian turn the other cheek, nor an argument for
forgiveness and understanding. Those who perform terrorist acts deserve
neither. Nor is it the soft-end of an either/or solution that has better
crisis response and heightened security at the other pole. In the short
term at least, we must do both.

Instead, it is a pragmatic approach to seeing our way clear to another
sort of future for the children of Beslan, and our children, too. A
future where it is possible to feel safe, to trust others and to plan
for the future. Not because there are more security checks and
razor-wire. But because we live in a world that doesn’t make terrorists
any more.