---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2005-05-07
title: 'Sex and the Teacher: Was Justice Done?'
---
Did unconscious sexism lead to a miscarriage of justice in the case of
Karen Ellis? On Thursday, the Court of Appeals threw out the 22 month
suspended sentence handed down in November by the County Court and
re-sentenced the 37 year old school teacher to nearly three years, 6
months of which she must serve in jail. The ruling found the initial
sentence had violated the principle of equality, including “equality of
concern for male and female victims and equality in the sentencing of
male and female offenders.”

“It is no longer acceptable,” said Justice Callaway, who presided over
the appeal, “that an offender be given a different sentence solely
because of his or her sex.”

For many, the facts of the Ellis case justified leniency. Ellis had made
full and frank admissions of her guilt and saved the State the expense
of a trial. She was clearly remorseful, lacked self pity and has already
suffered significant costs related to her trial and conviction. Her
career is finished as she can no longer work with children, her
placement on the sexual offenders registry - despite the court’s view
that she is “very unlikely” to re-offend - ensures a future of
considerable imposition and embarrassment for her and her three children
and the absence of a wedding ring at yesterday’s hearing suggests her
marriage is in trouble.

As well, the then–15 year old student Benjamin has insisted that he knew
at all times what he was doing and wanted to do it. He has even tendered
ferociously loyal statements to the Court in support of his former
teacher.

But Ellis victimised more than Benjamin. Her behaviour was an abuse of
both her power, and the trust placed in her - and those of all teachers
- by students, colleagues, employers, parents and society as a whole.
Moreover, while sex was not forced - if it was, the charge would have
been rape rather than penetration - the law holds that children under
sixteen simply lack the competence to consent to sexual activity with an
adult, particularly an adult in a position of power and authority. And
despite Ben’s assertion of being unusually mature for his age, the Court
found that his statements reflected an “insouciance about the moral
issues involved” that would be “disturbing” coming from anyone who
wasn’t so young. Indeed, his Honour suggests the possibility that Ellis
may have stunted Ben’s moral development, given the approval her
behaviour signalled to irresponsible sexual relationships and activity.

The ultimate sexism test is to read a roll call of Ellis’s crimes and to
substitute male pronouns for female ones when the reference is to the
teacher, and female for male when the student is discussed. Try it
yourself on the summary of the facts of the case I’ve excerpted from the
Court of Appeal’s ruling:

A 36-year-old married teacher begins kissing her 15-year-old year 10
student during secret meetings at school. Soon after, she collects him
in her car, drives to her house and they have sex upstairs in the
marital bed. One month later she collects the student and drives to her
house to have sex. After she drops him off near his home in the early
hours of the morning. This happens again a few days later, after which
she drops him near the school. Days later she collects him at the train
station and she performs oral sex on him at her house followed, the next
morning, by intercourse. On her day off, she collects him at the school
and again drives him to her house to have sex.

I’ll be frank, and admit my feelings did change depending on whether the
pronoun-conjured offender was male or female (though interestingly the
sex of the victim had little impact on my feelings of disgust and
outrage). The truth is, I intuitively felt more sympathy for the female
teacher.

Years ago I remember feeling dismayed by a study showing that students
were more likely to rate the exact same essay highly if the name at the
top was John, instead of Josephine, Doe. The truth is that our
unconscious views about the capacities, culpability and characters of
men and women do shape the way we understand events, and render
judgements about fault.

But this is not how it ought to be, and the Appeals Court has been right
to say so, and to ensure that in the Ellis case, justice was finally
done.