---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2005-08-15
tag: writings
title: The Sins of Scholarship
---
Few academics would have slept through the long-running Australian
history wars. Sparked by claims made by retired academic Keith
Windshuttle that several prominent scholars - among them Henry Reynolds
and Lyndall Ryan - misrepresented or falsified data in order fabricate a
version of Aboriginal history consistent with pre-existing political
agendas, the debate threw a sharp and very public spotlight on the
fallibility of scholars and scholarly methods.

Reynolds and Ryan, as well as multiple and eminent defenders, have done
well to demolish the fabrication claim, and in doing so, provided the
public with a rare and fascinating glimpse into fractious disagreement
amongst historians about what constitutes valid historical method and
interpretive truth.

However, less certainty surrounded the treatment of their errors of
attribution and referencing. Errors that Windshuttle claimed were at the
heart of his assault on the veracity of the two historians’ claims.
Eminent historian Stuart Macintyre, for example, saw Windshuttle’s
identification of sources that did not “support what the historians
reported [and] others [that did] not even exist” as “damaging,” while
prize-winning historian Inga Clendinnen ultimately dismissed what she
described as Ryan’s “multiple and consequential” referencing errors as
“few, explicable and trivial”.

The truth is that Reynolds and Ryan are human. This means that like all
academics, it is likely they will err at some point in their career.
That this is the case doesn’t necessarily make the consequences of such
errors less serious, but it does go to motive, and thus critically bears
on the way those mistakes should be judged and the legitimacy of
proposed responses. The challenge for academics and those who judge them
- usually other academics and the public at large - is to distinguish
between honest mistakes, scholarly incompetence and various forms of
academic criminality. Interestingly, while questions of motive are at
the heart of public and institutional scrutiny of academic error, few
professional codes or guidelines distinguish mistakes on the basis of
intention or, indeed, anything else. Indeed, most discussions about
proper academic conduct are addressed to students, with scholars seen as
the enforcers - never the violators - of accepted codes.

**Honest Mistakes**

These are likely to be one-off errors, rather than part of a pattern.
They also seem more explicable by human fallibility (a momentary lack of
concentration, a transcription error in the publication process missed
during the proofing process) than a deliberate attempt to deceive. An
example might be a sole paragraph in an otherwise lengthy book lacking
proper attribution by an academic with an otherwise unblemished record
and a plausible story about how the footnote got lost.

Punishment: None. The public shaming and unavoidable damage to
reputation more than adequate.

**Scholarly Incompetence**

Here a pattern may exist (of paraphrasing without proper attribution or
of footnotes referring to incorrect sources) but intention to steal, lie
or otherwise deceive appears lacking. Instead, a plausible story can be
told of note-taking or attribution practices where such errors seem
likely, if not inevitable. Academics are culpable for failings resulting
from incompetence because their consequences are damaging and
unacceptable. However, such errors must be distinguished from those that
result from immoral motives.

Punishment: None, but remediation (retraining, counseling) necessary.

**Academic Criminality**

May be one-off, or part of a pattern of academic errors that includes
plagiarism, falsification of experimental results or other data/sources
and the use of knowingly false data to draw conclusions. Such
wrongdoings may be compounded by the use of knowingly false results to
earn rewards, like high-level publications or grants. What is shared by
all academic acts of criminality is the intention by the scholar to
commit them, or a post-haste knowledge they were committed without an
attempt to rectify the error.

Punishment: In addition to shaming through exposure of the crime to
colleagues and the wider public, the academic criminal should be
expelled from the scholarly community, losing grants, jobs and other
positions of respect and trust.

The bottom line is that not all academic mistakes are the same. Some are
only human, with sympathy and forgiveness the only legitimate response.
But when there is a pattern, evidence of intention to deceive or both,
the public and the community of scholars must respond swiftly to
rehabilitate the incompetent, and expel the incorrigible.