---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2005-01-14
tags: ~
title: Why are Young Women Welcoming the Return of the Bunny?
---
The Playboy symbol is enjoying a resurgence in popularity. What does
this signify?

It’s everywhere. In the smartest shops in Acland Street, and featuring
in trendy Chapel Street in Prahran. On natty little terry short and the
smart canvas gym-bag purses that are the currently the pinnacle of
street-wear chic. The Playboy Bunny logo is back. The question is: what
does its return mean?

I’m going to nail my colours to the mast here. When I see that Bunny,
the image that comes to mind are of tall, large-breasted women with
strap-on fur tails tottering somewhat unsteadily on spike-heels; their
painted red lips stretched into a fake-looking smile as a diminutive,
bathrobe-wearing Hugh Hefner snakes his wizened, overly tan arms around
their waists.

The Bunny logo also makes me think of Gloria Steinem, who was young and
pretty enough to go undercover as a Bunny Cocktail waitress at the
Playboy Club in New York City. Though I wasn’t even born when her expose
of the degrading and oppressive conditions women endured working in this
supposedly glamorous job appeared in Esquire in 1963, I was impressed
with her insights - published years later in a collection of essays -
into the cost of Bunnyhood not just to the minority of women who don
overlarge pink ears or pose for centrefolds, but to all women who live
in societies where Bunnyhood is seen as a suitable career aspiration for
young girls of talent.

This is what the Bunny logo means to me, and perhaps to other
feminist-minded women and men of my, and more mature, vintages. And this
is why I won’t buy anything that carries it. But Bunny-stamped items are
selling well particularly - according to my local shop girl - to women
in their teens and early twenties. The question is: why?

Perhaps the reason is simple, and actually suggests something quite
positive. The traditional Playboy model is far more rounded and
healthy-looking than the under-fed, under-slept female form idealised in
so many women’s magazines. Maybe in wearing the Bunny symbol, what young
women are saying is that they are proud of their womanly curves, and
prefer them to looking like a heroin-addicted stick.

Another positive take on the Bunny’s return is that in donning this
long-standing symbol of female oppression, women are reclaiming it as a
sign of empowerment. In the same way that Gays reclaimed as a symbol of
unity and pride the pink triangle that the Nazis used to brand and
oppress them, young Bunny-wearing women are boldly proclaiming their
faith in a world where Girl Power reigns and feminism - simply because
it is no longer needed - is a thing of the past. In such a world girls
can freely embrace both their femininity and sexuality without fear of -
as one Girl-Power scholar puts it - its “usual worrisome baggage.”

A less optimistic interpretation, however, is that women’s embrace of
the Bunny reflects their sense of disillusionment with - rather than
empowerment within - the post-industrial world in which they are coming
of age. Maybe, more than we realise, young women are tuning in when we
older ones complain of unequal wages, sexual harassment,
family-unfriendly policies and impenetrable glass ceilings at the
workplace. Perhaps they observe when those zealously guarding the reigns
of power either ridicule our distress, or ignore it. For such young
women, the Playboy symbol may hold out the time-honoured promise that if
they’re pretty, “put out” and otherwise play their cards right, there is
a way for them to make it to the top of the status and income pile: on
the arm of a wealthy and powerful man.

So which interpretation is the correct one? The evidence, in my view, is
in favour of the Bunny as a symbol of Girl Power. Sure, there are
differences in the way the Gay Pride movement reclaimed the pink
triangle and the reappearance of the Bunny logo. The former was a
self-consciously political act by a grass-roots activist movement, while
the latter is nothing more than a marketing experiment. Nevertheless,
there are natty shorts with the Bunny on it and many more without -
ditto cute handbags - and significant numbers of young women are
choosing to buy the former. Given what we know about the optimism of
youth in general, and the disinterest of so many young women in a
feminism they see as irrelevant to their lives, there is good reason to
believe that in embracing the Bunny, young women see themselves as
reclaiming male-centred ideas of femininity and female sexuality, and
making them their own.

It’s hard not to admire them. Certainly, you can’t blame them. Given the
choice of viewing the future in such a promising light or as hedged and
barricaded by entrenched, often subterranean but always fiercely
defended power and privilege, who wouldn’t choose the former? And isn’t
the belief that such a world can exist, indeed does exist, a necessary
prerequisite for actually bringing it about? “You go girls,” I want to
cheer. And so I will.

I just hope they’re right.