---
assets: ~
categories: writings
excerpt: Over my (far too) many years of studentship and academic employment, I have
  bought (far too) many books, (far too) many of which have stagnated on my shelves,
  growing dusty and churlish from disuse. Amongst this unedifying lot have never been
  tomes edited or authored by Peter Singer. This is not because it is impossible to
  disagree with Singer, or to occasionally find his fearless exploration of the most
  complex, sensitive and interesting ethical issues of our times unsatisfying terse
  and one-dimensional. But rather because with the exception of de Botton, Singer
  is without peer when it comes to picking the right topic and penning erudite and
  accessible prose steeped in casual references to philosophical debates on similar
  issues dating back thousands of years. In The Moral of the Story, written in partnership
  with wife Renata, he does it again, compiling an anthology that students, academic
  philosophers and writers interested in ethics (and what writer isn’t) will pull
  off the shelf to thumb through again and again.
link: ''
published: 2005-04-23
title: 'Book Review - The Moral of the Story: An anthology of ethics through literature'
---
The Moral of the Story: An anthology of ethics through literature edited
by Peter Singer and Renata Singer RRP: $49.95

Over my (far too) many years of studentship and academic
employment, I have bought (far too) many books, (far too) many of which
have stagnated on my shelves, growing dusty and churlish from disuse.
Amongst this unedifying lot have never been tomes edited or authored by
Peter Singer. This is not because it is impossible to disagree with
Singer, or to occasionally find his fearless exploration of the most
complex, sensitive and interesting ethical issues of our times
unsatisfying terse and one-dimensional. But rather because with the
exception of de Botton, Singer is without peer when it comes to picking
the right topic and penning erudite and accessible prose steeped in
casual references to philosophical debates on similar issues dating back
thousands of years. In The Moral of the Story, written in partnership
with wife Renata, he does it again, compiling an anthology that
students, academic philosophers and writers interested in ethics (and
what writer isn’t) will pull off the shelf to thumb through again and
again.

The Singers describe themselves as editors of The Moral of the Story but
they are much more. Clearly dedicated readers of quality fiction, they
do a superlative job at what I’m sure was the humbling task of selecting
- then editing for purpose and sense - the back-list of western
civilisation. Having been refused permission by a number of authors,
including American Psycho author Bret Easton Ellis, to anthologise their
work in the collection, they ultimately settle on 79 excerpts by 61
authors. These include pieces from Genesis, Sophocles, Shelly, Ibsen,
Dickens, Arna Bontemps, James Baldwin, S. Yizhar, Ursula Le Guin, Joyce
Carol Oates, Kathy Lette and the comic writer Douglas Adams.

I was familiar with about one quarter of the material, though
interestingly I found this neither diminished (through repetition) or
enhanced (because of my stored bank of additional knowledge of character
and plot) my enjoyment of the material. Instead, the pruning of each
selection and its filing under a particular section heading (as a story
exploring “Duties to God” or the moral issues that arise around paid
“Work” or “War”) refocused my attention on a previously unconsidered
aspect of a particular tale, giving the story - no matter how familiar -
new life.

But the real value-add comes in the Preface to collection, and the
Singers’ introduction to each of the book’s 15 sections. Here they set
the ethical scene, introducing the issues in play - and the conflict of
values that typically arise - when considering, say, “Duties to Kin”,
“New Life Forms” or “Animals and the Environment”. As well, those
interested in using the book’s fictional excerpts as a teaching aid will
find a range of issues and pertinent questions arising from each
selection compiled at the back.

Some of these introductions are done extremely well. I was particularly
impressed with the one on “Love, marriage and sex”, in which the authors
observe that while the decision of whether and who to marry will “have
more impact on our lives than most other decision we make”, there has
been “relatively little serious discussion about the values underlying
the choice of mate”. They then briefly explore the various literary
models of the ideal romantic relationship: Shakespeare’s depiction of
sudden passionate love in Romeo and Juliet; de Maupassant’s contention
in The Model that lasting love requires a “deeper union of the minds”;
Seth’s suggestion, made through Lata’s ultimate choice of Haresh for her
husband in A Suitable Boy, that arranged marriages based upon common
values provides the firmest foundation for mature love to eventually
flourish.

Unfortunately, other such preemptory remarks are less consistent with
the spirit of inquiry, rather than argument, that rightly characterises
an exploration of ethics through literature. Indeed, what the authors
seem to miss in their early discussion of the key differences in the way
literature and philosophy approach ethics is the ultimately different
aims of each for doing so. The aim of philosophical argument is to prove
the rightness of one’s own claims, in part, by exposing the flaws in our
opponents’ arguments. In contrast, the best books and plays resist the
temptation to argue conclusively for a particular point of view.
Instead, they seek to deepen our emotional understanding of the
complexity and profundity of particular value conflicts by putting the
sharpest most persuasive arguments in the mouths of the characters on
both side of the case. This not only sharpens the value conflict and
consequently the drama, but grants legitimacy to the existence of the
conflict in the first place.

“There’s no need to fight about these things,” says the philosopher.
“This argument proves conclusively that the others are wrong and I am
right.”

“Of course we must fight about these things,” counters the writer. “Who
but God could witness such a contest and have any idea who is right?”

To avoid the emotional retreat and defensiveness that many have to
philosophical preaching, novelists draw us into a conflict by
emphasising its acuity, and the lack of certainty even very good people
can feel about the right thing to do. Ironically, this suggests that the
road to a deep and full understanding of the nature and meaning of a
moral dilemma also leads to moral relativism.

Now there’s a conundrum on which I would have like to have heard the
Singers pronounce.