---
assets: ~
categories: writings
excerpt: |-
  Spritely, sure-footed, rich with colour and authentic
  understanding of place, The Catch by first-time author Marg Vandeleur
  maintains its innocence and light-heartedness on a potentially
  chin-dragging topic: the shortage of suitable men for
  desperately-ticking women.
link: ''
published: 2005-04-09
title: 'Book review: The Catch'
---
by Marg Vandeleur, Penguin. RRP $22.95

Spritely, sure-footed, rich with colour and authentic
understanding of place, The Catch by first-time author Marg Vandeleur
maintains its innocence and light-heartedness on a potentially
chin-dragging topic: the shortage of suitable men for
desperately-ticking women.

At close to 36, curvaceous and pleasantly placid Colette (Letty) is
feeling her eggs age as she struggles to recover from a break-up with
her longstanding philandering boyfriend, and to find a suitable man with
whom to produce the baby for which she longs. A longing that she
attempts, though fails, to adequately explain to her child-indifferent
best friend, an insouciant lesbian novelist named Jules:

No Jules didn’t feel it. Perhaps that was where her ease, her lightness,
came from. The longing for a baby weighted Letty down. It was an
undertow to her existence. The further from her grasp it slipped, the
more intense the churning.

After a somewhat predictable romp for a suitable man through Melbourne’s
tragic dating scene (where angry divorced men and pathologically shy
ones fail to arrest her attention), Letty discovers that it’s no stroll
through the park finding a suitable donor amongst paternity-longing gay
men either. But finally Jules hits gold and introduces her to her match,
the queenly and caring Robert. Having abandoned the noisy landmark
Fitzroy street cafe Marios as a suitable site for the initial meet and
greet, she and Jules set the rendezvous at a pub across the street from
a pram-packed park. Robert is quick to list his qualifications for the
job:

I’m kind. I’m not the smartest guy in the world, but I’m not dumb
either. I find little things amusing. I’ve always wanted a baby and now
my clock is ticking double-time. I’d make a lovely father. And I’ve had
all the tests. I’ve got about seven hundred thousand billion sperm or
something like that. A lot.

Never self-indulgent, or obviously politically correct (the narrative’s
attaching of parental longing to both straight and gay men and women
deftly undermines any essentialist understanding of Letty’s quest),
Vandeleur paints a picture of the quintessential modern woman facing the
“What, no baby?” problem. The problem faced by too many educated,
interesting, and accomplished Australian women in finding the right sort
of man to love and share the work and sacrifices of parenting before the
sands of their fertile years run out.

But while Letty’s arduous journey through donor selection and
self-impregnation leave us with no illusions about the significant
“catch” attached to the desires of single women for motherhood, and
Letty makes no bones bones about her desire to “catch” the right man,
neither does she intend to be “caught” in any old relationship simply
because she knows her time is running out. Her self-esteem so
fundamental to who she is as to need no remark, Letty understands - and
proceeds on the principle - that she is better off parenting a donor-bub
alone then partnered to a man who doesn’t attract her physically and
emotionally (her pet hate is scuffed shoes with a business suit). It’s
hard not to like Letty as she doggedly pursues her maternal dreams
through “Weekly Weighers” and several failed pregnancy attempts without
losing her sense of humour, proportion, or compassion for the various
trials of her gang of colourful friends.

Her emotional needs met by her friends, her financial by her own
start-up business, Letty seems to demonstrate the truth of recent
research findings that while women still want me, they don’t need them.
And it is the gap between what women desire, and men are willing or able
to produce - at least for those in the current “transitional” generation
like Letty - that is causing all the angst.