---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2005-05-15
title: Why We Will Resolve the Conflict Between Work and Family
---
Workers are demanding better working conditions, and conditions for
family life

If debate on this page over the last few weeks has made anything clear,
it is that motherhood has driven a red-hot stake through the heart of
the sisterhood - if such a thing ever existed in the first place. Equal
pay for equal work, more funding for women’s diseases like breast
cancer, tougher sentences for rapists: on these things most women agree.
But as Naomi Wolf discovered during her jaunt through Australia’s
capital cities last week, mention motherhood and the claws come out.

Yet despite the difficulties women and the women’s movement have talking
about motherhood - or more precisely the nature of the conflict mothers
experience between work and family and how it should be resolved - it
remains an issue of major issue concern for contemporary women. Not just
women who already have children, but the 92% of young women who want to
have them, as well as a steady partner and career, in the future.

Feminists have been the ones who have identified women’s unhappiness
about work/family imbalance and the main ones to suggest solutions to
the problem, yet the women’s movement is unlikely to ever muster the
political muscle to compel change. This is because the transformations
required - no less than the structural reorganisation of paid employment
and an increasingly globalised economy - are too major, and the forces
arrayed against such change too powerful.

Yet change will come. Indeed, profound changes in the size and makeup of
Australia’s population that are already underway make it inevitable.

Australian women now have on average only 1.73 children each, a
fertility rate far below the 2.1 children per woman needed for steady
population growth. And according to the ABS, the rapid dive of our
fertility rate is set to continue. On one estimate, it will fall to 1.3
by 2008. During this time, our already rapidly aging population will
continue to age. Indeed, by 2051 the ABS predicts there will be three
times as many Australians aged 65 to 84, and half the number of
children, than was the case in 1971.

What this means is that as the children of the largest generation we’ve
had in quite some time, the Baby-Boomers, make their way from their
current starting positions in the labour force to the positions of power
their parents and those from Generation X now occupy, there will be
increasingly smaller pools of applicants from which to select their
replacements. Sure, business will do as it currently does today, compete
like mad for skilled migrants to make up the difference, but given the
low fertility scenario is happening across the western world, Australian
business is unlikely to be successful enough to significantly relieve
the skilled labour shortage.

This is when things will get interesting. Because - unlike today -
employers will no longer have the luxury to say, favour a childless
applicant or a man with a full-time wife at home over a working mother
to fill a given vacancy, the current practice of marginalizing workers -
mostly mothers - who can’t arrive at 7:00 in the morning and put in
face-time until 8:00 at night will end. As is always the case when
labour is short, workers will have far more control than they do
currently over their conditions of employment.

Some will no doubt make the trade that global capitalism favours:
exchanging increased productivity (read: more time every week at work)
for higher wages. But I suspect many more will bargain for what is
already and will continue to be the scarcest commodity in contemporary
life - time. Along with their secure career-track jobs, these workers
will demand capped time, fractional time, flexible time, work-at-home
time and time to go visit their kids on the days the other parent -
demanding the same conditions - is not at home with them at the
subsidised work-place based cr&egrave;che. And it won’t just be working
mothers demanding such conditions, it will be dads, too. Because if
there is one way in which feminism has changed the world, it is in
changing men’s beliefs not only about women’s right to paid employment,
but their own responsibility to share in the work of running a household
and raising the kids.

Empty nesters wanting time to help care for their grandkids, childless
workers wishing to donate quality time to a cherished social cause or
hobby, the unemployed. All these groups, as well as parents, will
benefit from the long overdue reversal of global capitalism’s relentless
push towards the “downsizing” that means little more in their day-to-day
lives than more time at the office doing two jobs instead of one. In the
new world, it is more likely that two jobs will be shared between two
and one half people, or even three.

Rapidly declining fertility rates not only indicate the unhappiness of
contemporary women and men with work/family imbalance, it points to the
way the problem will be solved.

And I for one, can’t wait.