---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2005-06-18
title: Popular, yes - but is it moral?
---
It’s been driving me crazy for years, but John Howard’s comments in
Parliament early this week about the rectitude of mandatory detention
and public support for it, tipped me over the edge. The time has come
for some clarity in the minds of public figures and commentators about
what public support for something does - and does not mean - in terms of
morality.

In fact, the Prime Minister was clearer than most. At least his
assertion that the mandatory detention policy was both “right” and
supported by Australians attempted to discriminate between the morally
correct and the popularly acclaimed. Many commentators never get that
far. At a public lecture at an esteemed university last year, I listened
to a highly regarded intellectual give a speech in which she both
bemoaned the Howard’s government’s failure to heed the majority when it
came to the war in Iraq AND rolled her eyes about the ignorant
immorality of the masses when it came to mandatory detention. In the
first instance, mass support was used as evidence of moral rectitude. In
the second, the lack of it was, too. You can’t have it both ways, I
pointed out at question time. From her expression, it was clear the
contradiction never crossed her mind.

In the same way, shock-jocks and politicians dump on judges for
sentences they deem to be “out of touch” with “community standards”, as
if this misalignment was proof positive the judges got it wrong. Yet
another demonstration of confusion amongst those who really ought to
know better .

The truth is that there is no necessary relationship between what’s
popular and what’s right. At the end of the 1800s in the US, the
majority supported slavery; this century most Afrikaners supported
apartheid. Until relatively recently, in historical terms, many
Australians gave the White Australia policy a tic.

Why is confusion about what’s ethical, and what’s popular, so rife?
Perhaps it’s to do with the importance to politicians of public opinion.
If what matters - and according to some democratic theory anyway - what
ought to matter to politicians is what the public thinks, than public
opinion rightly becomes the arbiter of good and bad political behavior.
From there, the equation of good political performance with good moral
performance doesn’t require much slippage.

Or maybe the belief, widely-spruiked by populist politicians, that
“average Australians” score highly when it comes to common-sense
morality is to blame. Since by definition, most of us are “average”
Australians, this equates majority views with moral ones.

Yet the truth is that public support for a policy indicates noting more
than that most people like it. To gain an ethical seal of approval, the
policy must conform to more abstract standards about decision-making
wisdom, maximal utility or principles that crudely reduce to the golden
rule and a steadfast commitment to never using others as a means to our
ends.

According to any such criteria, serious questions can be raised about
the Prime Minister’s claim that the government’s approach to
unauthorized arrivals is “right”. And following this, that he would be
right to gag debate on the Private Member’s bills designed to make the
policy more compassionate and fair.

It’s hard to argue that a person of good character would permit others
who’ve committed no crime - and have good odds of eventually being found
to be a refugee - to be detained for lengthy periods or indefinitely.
This makes the government’s migration policy problematic for those
espousing Virtue Theory.

Utilitarian ethicists are about weighing overall benefits against harms.
Current migration policy was adopted to contain the claimed risks posed
by large numbers of bogus asylum seekers, yet since its inception
changed politics in the regional have seen such arrivals slow to a
trickle. The cost to individual asylum seekers, however, remains vast
and includes physical and mental health problems that in some cases lead
to self-harm and - when it comes to children - what experts claim may be
irreversible developmental damage. Negligible benefits and vast and
significant harms: where’s the morality in that?

Finally, at the heart of “do unto others” is a recognition of the human
needs - and human rights - of others. Yet while the Government
recognizes the human rights of Australians, detainees are treated as
though they are less than fully human and therefore somehow deserving of
the loss of dignity, justice and freedom they suffer. To put it simply,
we have duties to these people - to honour their rights and of care -
that we are failing to meet.

So while it may not be popular to say it, I find little in ethical
theory to persuade me that the Government’s policy of mandatory
detention is right. If the Prime Minister believes otherwise, he should
welcome debate on the issue, rather than attempt to gag it, as a chance
to make his case.