---
assets: ~
categories: writings
excerpt: ' Jesse Blackadder’s first novel is an exploration of the physical and eclectic
  social terrain of Byron Bay: Sydney-sider holiday escape and stopover de rigour
  for the backpacker set. It follows the chain of events set into motion by Zac’s
  near-death experience at a party given by the emotionally inscrutable Black Dragon.
  Over a three-week period, Zac, Black Dragon, her friend Madeline and Zac’s girlfriend
  Kate roam between Sydney and Byron, searching and ultimately discovering important
  truths critical to unlocking their true vocation or potential for love.'
link: ''
published: 2005-07-23
title: Book Review - After the Party - Jesse Blackadder
---
After the Party by Jesse Blackadder. Melbourne: Hardie Grant Books,
2005.

Jesse Blackadder’s first novel is an exploration of the physical
and eclectic social terrain of Byron Bay: Sydney-sider holiday escape
and stopover de rigour for the backpacker set. It follows the chain of
events set into motion by Zac’s near-death experience at a party given
by the emotionally inscrutable Black Dragon. Over a three-week period,
Zac, Black Dragon, her friend Madeline and Zac’s girlfriend Kate roam
between Sydney and Byron, searching and ultimately discovering important
truths critical to unlocking their true vocation or potential for love.

Blackadder knows Byron well, though she is most successful in conveying
its unique hippy cosmopolitan groove indirectly through the
matter-of-fact way she describes some of its more bizarre denizens.
Like, for instance, Pan and his half-feral cross-dressing band of male
faeries who rescue Zac after a failed ocean suicide attempt. The
following morning, Zac wakes to find himself in a house that is
“single-handedly holding back the advance of the rainforest” near a
make-shift dome enclosing “a solemn circle of seven men and women and a
small, smoky fire”. Just then a man dressed as a woman in a gold
cocktail gown and a pink feather boa, totters into view. “Yoo hoo! Pan!
I’m late as usual. I lost my fucking eyelash on your fucking muddy path.
When are you going to get a man to do some work about the place?”

Less convincing are the over-wordy riffs about and to the place
sprinkled liberally - and unnecessarily - throughout the text. Riffs
that sometimes run for pages with lines like “Welcome to Byron Bay, so
beautiful it will make you weep” and “You are the gazuumper on the dream
home, the developer who buys the last of the breach front land.” I also
grew to detest the subheadings scattered liberally through each chapter.
At best, they unnecessarily foreshadowed events (like the one entitled
“Foccacia” that keyed me into the fact that the next few paragraphs
would contain someone eating one). At worst, they were eye-rollingly
twee, like the “You Give Me Fever” one preceding Zac’s sweat-drenched
awakening to a serous flu-like illness. Occasionally, a smug omnipotent
narrator creeps into the third-person voice, begging the question of his
or her identity and source of knowledge about the characters’ pasts and
futures. For all such errors of judgement, I am more inclined to blame
editor than author. It is the latter’s job to take risks, and the
formers to indicate when these succeed and fail.

And sometimes Blackadder’s risks do succeed. Throughout the book is the
motif of the stalking hand of death whose needs must be satiated to
balance the books of fate. When Zac evades death’s grasp in the early
pages of the book, an aging whale succumbs instead, the mourning cries
of its pod filling the ocean with sadness. Later, it is the life of a
young girl whose story intersects with that of the mysterious Black
Dragon that is snatched in the place of the new relationships, lives and
possibilities that have emerged since the party. None too original, but
Blackadder carries it off well, adding to After the Party’s cosmic
beating-of-the-butterfly’s-wings theme of the interconnectedness of
nature and those linked through the bonds of love.