---
assets: ~
published: 2005-04-18
tags: ~
title: 'School Holidays: Give Us A Break'
---
For me, school holidays are like housework: highly demanding,
ever-present and seemingly never done. My problem, in a nutshell, is
while I’d be happy to have the kids at home, the demands of my work mean
this only sporadically and occasionally possible. Most of the time, I
need care. This means that every time those dreaded two weeks draw near,
my “to-do” list looks like this.

First, reschedule and otherwise shift as much work as possible away from
the period in question. Then, ask my partner what days might be
available at his office when the other directors won’t have their kids
with them, clients won’t be visiting and he’ll be able to shift his
workload around enough to send a few employees home so that he can park
our kids in front of computer games and the world wide web for the day.
Simultaneously SOS everyone on my “working parents” email contact list
to discover if we can coordinate care swaps (of the “I’ll take your
older one Friday if you’ll have mine on Monday but only if both of us
can make similar arrangements for the younger ones on those days too” -
type) or mutual activities (of the “mine will only go to sports camp if
your child goes too” - type). Finally, ring up both sets of grandparents
and plead for the odd day or three

By the time that final Friday arvo bell rings (one hour earlier than
usual, just to add insult to injury) my desktop resembles a war room.
Phone ringing, palm pilot synching, incoming e-mail indicator bobbing
like a jack in the box, and - as testament to my weeks of effort - a
calendar hastily blu-tacked to the wall splattered with victorious blue
tics and a measle-rash of red question marks.

Perhaps not surprisingly, I find this process depressing. Not just
because of the persistence, eye for detail and logistical ingenuity it
entails, but its sheer repetitiveness. It feels like I’ve only just
recovered from organising myself for one school holiday, when the next
one looms. I also find it frustrating that in spite of my efforts, my
children nearly always end up attending programs that are either low
quality, exorbitantly expensive or - when things really go pear-shaped -
both. And I’m one of the lucky ones: at least I can afford some paid
care. A recent study showed that many Australian parents can’t, and are
instead forced to take their annual leave at different times to cover
the mismatch between the demands of work and those of school breaks.

The truth is that the decision to divide the approximately 11 weeks
annual leave to which teachers and students are entitled into three two
weeks breaks, and five weeks around Christmas, reeks of 1950s
assumptions about parental work patterns that have relevance for
families of today.

ABS figures show that around half of families with children under 15
have both parents in the workforce. While many mothers (and a handful of
fathers) reduce their hours to reconcile the daily incongruity between
school and work hours, part-time work doesn’t solve the problems caused
by school holidays. For this, parents need a “term time” clause in their
contract. In one UK survey, 38% of women and 32% of men said they did or
would use such a clause if it were available to them. With 47% of women
and 34% of Australian men rating the freedom not to work during school
holidays as important, one might imagine a similarly enthusiastic
response here.

Yet many scholars now believe that parents are increasingly interested
in changing the world so they can balance work and family, rather than
using “special benefits” solutions to reduce the imbalance. In part,
this is likely to be because of the negative impact parental use of
part-time work, flexi-time and other such arrangements tends to have on
their wages, career progression and job security. Instead, parents want
institutions - like work and school - to change to better suit them.

How could this be done? My proposal is that for most of the year, school
should be a heads down/bums up affair, with breaks of only one week
during the spring and autumn. This leaves around 8 weeks for an extended
break over the summer which could start before Christmas and run through
most of February.

Not only would this approach keep kids out of the classroom during the
hottest days of the year, and return to families of lesser means the
freedom to holiday together, it would also enable the summer camp
business - day and overnight - to develop and thrive.

Such camps would offer high quality care for children at lower costs in
part because every year staff, food, insurance and transport need to be
organised only once. And, mercifully, only once would also be the number
of times parents needing care for their children during the break would
need to examine the options, pay their money and make their choice.