---
assets: ~
excerpt: Motherhood is the latest in a long line of cri de coeur books by baby-boom
  women about what is claimed to be the incompatibility of “feminist” ideas about
  motherhood and female emancipation and their lived experience of motherhood. Like
  Manne, such authors breathed feminist assumptions - about the equality of men’s
  and women’s talents, women’s need for economic independence and human flourishing
  - “as naturally as air”. But when their children are born, such women find they
  conflict with the way they want to mother (or as Manne prefers, the way children
  need them to mother).
published: 2005-11-26
tags: ~
title: 'Book Review - Motherhood: How should we care for our children? Moving beyond
  the motherwars - changing the way we see and act'
---
by Anne Mannne, Allen & Unwin, 2005.

Motherhood is the latest in a long line of cri de coeur books by
baby-boom women about what is claimed to be the incompatibility of
“feminist” ideas about motherhood and female emancipation and their
lived experience of motherhood. Like Manne, such authors breathed
feminist assumptions - about the equality of men’s and women’s talents,
women’s need for economic independence and human flourishing - “as
naturally as air”. But when their children are born, such women find
they conflict with the way they want to mother (or as Manne prefers, the
way children need them to mother).

At the heart of Motherhood’s claim to know what children really need and
what therefore, according to the logic of such texts, mothers are
morally compelled to provide is Manne’s preternatural insight into the
emotional life of pre-verbal children: her own and other women’s.
Motherhood is replete with anecdotes about the mothers that breezily
assert the acceptability of their care arrangements when Manne - having
sized the situation up in less than a minute - knows better. “One
friend”, she reveals, “put her baby into full-time care when the baby
was nine months old. Meeting me in the street, she anxiously assured me
that the baby was \`quite happy’ in care. But the baby told a different
story. When the caregiver’s name was mentioned, she put her arms around
her mother’s neck, and with look of indescribable sadness, laid her head
down on her mother’s shoulder.”

Manne offers “maternal feminism” as a cutting-edge framework for
resolving these issues rather than a theoretical relic of the 1980s
impossibly encumbered by the same problems of regressive essentialism
that plague Motherhood. Indeed, the book’s key take-home message is that
the relationship between mothers and babies can not be “replaced” by
paternal or other sorts of care. Perhaps because even the selective
reporting of research findings that she uses to such great effect
elsewhere won’t work to support this claim, Manne relies on anecdote and
the views of a famous Australian cartoonist, to make her case. She tells
of arriving home early from the library to hear her daughter crying: “”I
rushed in to find my husband…trying to soothe her. When I picked her up
she turned her head towards my shoulder. She took a long, deep,
suspicious sniff, turned her head to one side, smiled and fell asleep.
She smelt her mother."

Having approvingly cited Leunig’s take on attachment theory, Manne
somewhat incoherently presents an anecdote about the inadequacies of
grandparental to make her case against institutional childcare: “A
perceptive grandmother, an exceptionally sensitive caregiver, who looked
after her two little grandchildren full-time while the mother worked,
once told of the oldest stopping deal in the middle of play and suddenly
crying out for her mother’s face. \`Where’s that dear face? Where is
it?’’”

It is worth pausing here to ask some questions about the implied moral
of this story: that if a child ever misses her Mum the mother’s absence
is wronging the child and must be remedied. Is the pain of missing a
beloved other than a mother good enough reason to change care
arrangements too? Some babies cry whenever their mothers step into the
shower, or attempt to go to the toilet or the doctor alone. Must good
mothers abandon such solitary journeys? If the baby misses Dad at work
or a sibling at school, must they also be tethered to home? Indeed, if
we ignore the implications of Manne’s arguments and accept her claim to
believe in the capacity of children to attach to both their fathers and
mothers, doesn’t the “missing as tragedy” argument imply that what
children need is 24/7 access to both parents?

But absent scholarship and faulty logic are only some of the problems
plaguing Motherhood. The others reduce to honesty and integrity.
Motherhood is a polemic that has nothing to do with “moving beyond the
motherwars”, and everything to do with championing the at-home mother as
the good one. Her advice to women confronting work/life dilemmas? You
can have it all, but “in sequence”, not “all at once”.

More disturbingly, Manne mischaracterizes key thinkers and important
debates. She claims that feminist Eva Cox said at-home mothers raise
“narcissistic monsters incapable of sharing”, when a quick internet trip
to the Boyer lectures reveals the complete lack of fit between this
description and Cox’s far more temperate point. Manne asserts that a
2002 study by a university student claiming bad outcomes for small
children spending long hours in daycare was “attacked on every media
outlet”. However, a review of the print media during this period reveals
that while news items were either slanted in favour of the study or were
balanced, 7 of the 8 opinion pieces lavishly praised the study and
castigated its mythical critics. The one exception was a piece by the
head of the Australian Institute of Family Studies refuting the claims
of columnist Bettina Arndt that because one of his expert staff
questioned the validity of the study’s methodology, she and the entire
Institute were guilty of left-wing bias.

The publication of Motherhood will ensure Manne’s views continue to
feature in debates on work/life balance and childcare. We can only hope
it influence the weight and credibility they are accorded as well.