---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2006-05-20
tags: ~
title: Victims of a Lost Puritanism
---
Book Review - Lost: Illegal abortion stories. Edited by Jo Wainer,
foreward by Helen Garner. Carlton, Melbourne University Press, 2006. 214
pages. ISBN: 0~~522~~85231–9

For some, but perhaps not enough of us, time and people divide into two
categories: the time before abortion laws were liberalised, and the time
after; those who remember what it was like prior to decriminalisation,
and those who don’t.

Lost is about the time before, written for those who came after, or who
wish to pay tribute to the women they knew who lived through those
terrible before-times by bearing witness to their stories. It is edited
and introduced by Dr Jo Wainer whose own life, according to a somewhat
different chronology, also divides into before and after. Her first
20-odd years before she became the inaugural treasurer of the Abortion
Law Reform Association in 1967, and all that’s come after in which, as
an activist, service-provider and now academic, she has dedicated to the
“task of understanding the political, legal, religious, social and
medical issues…buried in that one word - abortion.”

Wainer and writer Helen Garner, who authors a short foreword to the
collection, vividly describe the stifling, puritan backdrop of 1950s
Melbourne against which the dramas of individual women play out. But it
is Lost’s collection of 21 first-hand accounts by aborting women - some
young, some old, nearly all poor - that captivate both attention and
heart. Stories, as Garner notes, that even without descriptions of the
women’s appearance or the way her voice sounds and body moves as she
talks, still contain “matter enough for a novel”.

Amy waited until marriage to have sex, only to discover she’d prefer to
bake a “lovely sponge cake” than have intercourse with her violent
alcoholic husband. She had several children in quick succession before -
unable to find effective contraception or to resist her husband’s
attention - she endured several anaesthetic-free curettes in a
stranger’s lounge room.

21-year old Belinda was denied the Pill by a doctor with a framed
picture of Mother Mary on his desk, and was lectured for half an hour on
the mortal sin of single women using contraception. When she became
pregnant, she wanted to continue, but her boyfriend refused to support
her. To get a safe abortion at 20 weeks she had to get a psychiatrist to
write a letter - the existence of which on her medical files spooked her
for years afterwards - saying she’d be an unfit mother.

Sixteen year old Beverly’s instructions from the backyarder who
consented to terminate her were as follows: “Come here Thursday morning
with $600, bring a packet of pads, a packet of Panadol and don’t expect
to go home until Friday night”. When she hesitated before spreading her
legs on the man’s kitchen table, he admonishes: “Don’t worry about your
pride and dignity now, girl. You lost that the day you got yourself into
this mess”.

And on it goes. Bashed women. Scared women. Women so ignorant of the
rudiments of sex they don’t even realise they’re pregnant until in
labour and, even then, have little idea from what orfice the baby will
emerge. Women who accepted the contempt and even sexual violence of
abortion providers or the doctors they relied on for referrals to safer
practitioners as apt punishment for the sexual “sins” that led to the
abortion, or the abortion itself. And women who, inexplicably given the
tone and tenor of the times, reject all efforts to make them feel like
dirt: “Mind your own business and don’t bother sending me a bill!”
Belinda told the Mother Mary doctor before slamming the door behind her.
Says Beverly indignantly of her first interview with the backyard
provider: “He didn’t even ask my name”.

But while it is each story’s particularity that rivets, it was the
common elements of women’s stories - the secrecy, the exploitation, the
violence, the suffering, the death - that gave them political charge. Jo
and Bert Wainer knew this, and while Bert solicited the stories in Lost
in 1985 in a “lest we forget” spirit, he had used newspaper ads to urge
women to speak their truths before, and had used the information he
elicited to raise awareness of the costs to women and to society -
through the flowering of police corruption - of prohibition. Women’s
stories were at the heart of the Wainers’ agitation for a Royal
Commission into police corruption, and their pursuit of test cases that
established the reach of the common law ruling on which Victorian women
still rely for safe, legal services.

Before turning the first page of Lost, I hesitated. However worthy the
aim, I knew enough about the pre-legalisation era to know I was standing
on the threshold of a whole world of pain. But from Garner’s opening
words - “It’s an awe-inspiring force, the iron determination of a woman
who refuses to bear a child that she knows she cannot mother” - I was
hooked. Unable to put the book down, I read straight through to the end.

How could I have forgotten the compelling privilege of being invited
into the most painful and intimate corners of other people’s lives? In
particular, I felt touched by the way in which women’s fears, health and
lives were unquestionably at the centre of the moral Rubicon of
pre~~1980s abortion politics. Then, like now, the fetus was never far
from women’s minds: its potential to be their helpless, demanding and
desperately-loved baby the impetus for the abortion in the first place.
But unlike today, where women must battle to be seen and heard in the
public debate against chaste, silhouetted images of fetuses set off in
surrounds reminiscent of space capsules, the womb was opaque. Women
decided what doctors, husbands and others would know of the developing
life inside, and it was their experience of gestation and impeding
motherhood~~ wonder-filled or terrifying, desired or unwanted - that
mediated its relationship with others.

Indeed, at the heart of the contemporary abortion debate is one about
the moral frame. Are women at the centre of the story; those who should
rightly evoke our compassion and hold the trumping rights, or is it
fetuses? Are women autonomous choosers of abortion or duped and bereaved
victims of it?

I feel confident about what the Wainers, and the women of Lost, would
say.