---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2006-03-30
tag: writings
title: 'Abortion, Corruption & Cops: The Bertram Wainer Story'
---
Crochet hooks, castor oil, slippery elm bark, syringes full of Lifeuboy
soap and Dettol. Sepsis, gas gangrene of the uterus, hysterectomies on
12 year olds, deserted pregnant wives taking their children and jumping
off the St Kilda pier and women waiting, scared and alone, on a dark
windswept corner of Bourke Street for the stranger’s car that would take
them, huddled beneath a blanket on the floor of the backseat, to the
backyard abortionist. And if they haemorrhaged on the kitchen table, the
best they could hope for was to be dumped on the corner near the Royal
Women’s in the hope that someone would find them in time. Many died.

This was the reproductive terrain that Victorian women were forced to
negotiate 35 years ago when their “little friend” failed to arrive and,
because they were sick, poor, young, bashed or simply unable to shoulder
the burdens of motherhood at that time, decided to seek an abortion. For
women of means, the illegal procedure would be provided by a qualified
gynaecologist in the comfort of a private hospital. Poor women took
their chances with well-meaning neighbourhood “Vera Drakes” or similarly
unqualified “backyarders.”

In 1967 Bertram Wainer, a Scottish-born St Kilda GP with a passionate
commitment to social justice and Jo Wainer, incipient feminist and
inaugural secretary of the Abortion Law Reform Association, sought
reform. In the process, they uncovered a web of corruption involving
doctors, backyard abortionists, high-ranking policemen and suspect
politicians. They ran three separate test cases to test the reach of the
newly-minted Menhennitt ruling that allowed abortion, prohibited in the
Victorian Crimes Act, in a limited range of circumstances.

Bert Wainer’s story is told in Abortion, Corruption & Cops, a film by
writer/director John Moore, whose previous credits include the
award-winning documentary Guns & Roses and Thomas of Arnhem Land. Moving
seamlessly between archival footage and dramatic recreations with Kurt
Geyer as Bert Wainer and Genevieve Picot as
backyard-abortionist-turned-good Peggy Berman, Moore summons up the
stifling prudery and religious moralism of the era. He interviews
grandmotherly-looking women whose eyes grow bright with fright as they
remember having to spread their legs on a stranger’s kitchen table while
instruments boiled away on the stove, or who still find it hard to laugh
when they recall how an unwanted pregnancy gave a girl first-hand
knowledge of the “lies, exploitation and deviousness” that accompany all
illegal practices.

But Bert Wainer’s story should resonate for more than just history
buffs. The Federal Government’s ill-disguised antagonism towards women’s
reproductive rights gives relevance to Wainer’s assertion that “abortion
will continue and have little, if anything, to do with the Church, the
law or the doctors, but have a very great deal to do with people and
particularly with women”. His moral indignation about police
confiscation of medical files, which he saw as an attack patient privacy
and dignity, seems a salutary reminder of the importance of these values
in light of recent government proposals to introduce a specific Medicare
item number for abortion counselling that could enable tracking of
doctors and women. “Every child a wanted child”, the poster Wainer
proudly hangs in his newly opened fertility clinic in East Melbourne,
remains a pertinent reply to those who hand-wring about the number of
abortions.

“Stand for something or fall for anything”, goes the old saying. Until
his death in 1987, Wainer stood for many things. It was his deep respect
for the police and their role in enforcing the rule of law that saw him
devastated by his discovery of corruption in the force, and his decision
to turn whistle-blower. As a medical student and intern, he’d had little
interest in abortion and, like other reputable doctors at the time, had
simply referred women to illegal provides when they came to him for
help. But when a woman came into his surgery dying from a botched
abortion but too terrified to go to hospital for fear of arrest, he
refused to look the other way. He got indignant, angry and - in the best
feminist tradition - active. But while sympathetic to women, Wainer was
no feminist. The man Moore describes in Abortion Corruption & Cops is a
social justice campaigner. A man whose own deprived upbringing had
alerted him to the ways in which the rich could circumvent harsh and
unjust laws, while the poor were forced to live with - or die from -
their consequences.

In her new book about women’s stories of illegal abortion, timed for
release to coincide with the screening of Abortion, Corruption & Cops,
Jo Wainer says that having “tweaked the tail” of the State, Bert
suffered its retributive power. In return for having forced a public
inquiry into police corruption and opened the state’s first legal
abortion clinic. Bert Wainer was bankrupted by the Australian Tax
Office, evicted from his medical surgery by a landlady under pressure
from a Catholic bishop, and censured by the AMA.

Abortion, Corruption & Cops: The Bertram Wainer Story screeed on SBS on
Thursday April 6, at 8:30pm.