---
assets: ~
published: 2006-11-30
tags: ~
title: "The Kovco Case: Motherâ\x80\x99s Grief Real, and So Are Her Questions"
---
The death of a loved one is always difficult. For parents, regardless of
the age of the child, anger, blame, impotence and guilt may accompany
more generally experienced feelings like shock, disbelief, confusion,
sadness, resentment, bitterness, hopelessness and depression.

The essential task of a parent, alongside teaching and loving their
children is protecting them. This may lead some parents to react to
their child’s accidental or violent death with feelings of failure and
guilt (“If only I’d…”). For many parents, a complete and unvarnished
account of the cause of death, a full explanation of any mistakes made,
and reassurance that systems have changed to avoid the recurrence of
such problems is critical to the success of their healing journey.

Judy Kovco’s public journey of grief and truth-seeking has laid bare the
tragedy and as yet unresolved questions surrounding her son Jake’s death
in Iraq in April. A claimed leak earlier this week of the military board
of inquiry’s conclusion that Jake Kovco died of an unintentional
self-inflicted gunshot wound may be one more example of the military’s
mishandling of the incident and its aftermath.

If this does turn out to be the board’s conclusion about how Jake Kovco
died, it is not the one his mother wants to hear. From the moment last
April when the Defence Minister wrongly informed the public that Kovco
was shot in the head while cleaning his gun - a mishap followed in short
order by the military’s mistaken repatriation of a Bosnian carpenter to
Australia, and the loss in Melbourne airport of the draft report into
this bungle - Judy has campaigned for the truth to be told about her
son’s death. Commenting on the lost report she noted that it would not
“bring my son back” or “tell…me what happened to my son. That’s what I
want to know.”

Judy Kovco’s approach and response to the military board of inquiry,
however, point to some long-held suspicions. The separate counsel she
and husband Martin engaged to represent them at the hearing made the
point as far back as July this year that, “There are three people that
had access to that firearm”. In response to police evidence at the
inquiry that Jake’s lethal injury was self-inflicted, Judy is reported
to have shouted “Keystone Kops!” before leaving the room. Not long
after, she appeared on TV implying that bungled repatriation of Jake’s
body was the consequence of a face-saving military cover-up. She said
there was “no way known” that Jake would have shot himself purposely or
accidentally, and that she would fight to obtain the truth for her son
“forever”.

In response to this week’s purported leak of the board’s forthcoming
conclusions, Judy questioned the basis of any conclusion that Jake shot
himself, and the trustworthiness of any investigation resulting in that
conclusion. “This was the army investigating the army”, she said, adding
that she has asked for a separate coronial inquiry. “I know what I have
to do for Jake. I will fight for Jake and I will fight for the truth…I’m
his mother and I will fight for him”.

What are we to make of Judy Kovco’s pursuit of another investigation
into the final moments of Private Jake Kovco?

On the one hand, she seems to have formed a view early on in the piece -
while still in the early stages of shock and grief - that someone other
than Jake may have caused the gun to discharge. In September, months
after retaining separate counsel that pursued this line of inquiry, she
told a reporter that she was still in “complete shock” from the death.
“I still haven’t come to grips with the fact that he’s gone”.

Has Judy Kovco imagined the bogey-men with whom she must do battle in
defence of her dead son, perhaps as a way of managing the terrible grief
a parent experiences on the death of a beloved child? Is her desire to
protect her son’s reputation from post-mortem slurs on his
professionalism blinding her to the weight of evidence about what really
happened?

On the other hand, Judy Kovco is only pointing out what is undeniably
true: that significant questions remain unanswered about the manner of
Jake’s death, and the way the military managed and investigated it. They
include queries about how the DNA of one of the soldiers with Kovco at
the time wound up on Jake’s gun; why the military failed to seal the
room after the incident, allowing Kovco’s clothes to be destroyed, and
the clothes and bodies of the soldiers present to be washed (destroying
potential forensic evidence); and the reason for the delayed military
police interviews of Kovco’s two roommates and others in the unit,
allowing the soldiers to get together and talk about the event. As the
profile of the case grew, questions must also be asked about the wisdom
of the military’s insistence on investigating itself, a decision that
former justice George Hampel says inspires a “perception that they will
look after their own”.

Conspiracy or cock-up? Grief-blinded mother or whistle-blower? Without
an independent investigation of the entire affair, we may never know.