---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2006-09-06
tags: ~
title: "Steve Irwin: Why we admired the boy who wouldnâ\x80\x99t grow up"
---
For me, the news of Steve Irwin’s death caused a Diana moment: the
molasses, freeze-time moment of shock that sears whatever one was doing
- going to lunch, cleaning the fridge, having a shower - on one’s
consciousness for ever. I sat at my computer and cried.

Why has Irwin’s death hit many of us so hard? In the rush to eulogise
him, several explanations of what he meant to Australia and Australians
have been served up. According to the Opposition Leader, Irwin was the
“quintessential Aussie Battler” who was a “terrific exponent of
Australian larrikin values”. Those in the tourist trade - at times
seeming sadder about the loss of a product than a person - proclaimed
him the “ambassador” for Queensland and Australia.

This is rubbish and, ironically just the sort that was responsible for
the subdued response some Australians had to the Crocodile Hunter when
compared to the untrammelled celebrity he enjoyed in the US. Few
national groups, Australians included, are going to take kindly to being
represented at home or abroad by a single individual, no matter who they
are or what they do. Such resistance is only likely to increase when the
summary of national identity includes phrases like sunburnt, rugged,
over-the-top and oafish, not necessarily in that order.

Irwin never claimed to represent Australia or Australians overseas, or
to in any way summarise how we think or who we are. The reality, which
he knew better than anyone, was that he was about as far from the
quintessential Australian as you could get: a bush dweller and
conservationist in a land of confirmed suburbanites indifferent to their
ever-expanding environmental footprints; a warp-speed extravert whose
chosen adverbs of degree - absolutely, extremely, really - contrasted
tellingly to the preference of his compatriots for somewhat, rather and
“a bit”. In a telling interview with Andrew Denton in 2003, replayed on
ABC TV last night as a tribute, Irwin frankly acknowledged the
embarrassment he caused his compatriots. I’m embarrassing, he explained
because “there’s a little bit of me in everybody”. In addition, what
Irwin called the “yeah, yeah, take it or leave it” attitude of Aussies
to everything, made them uncomfortable with his passionate embrace of
everything.

He may have only got it half right. As far as I can see, there’s way too
little of Irwin in most of us. Not only do we know it, we work damn hard
to keep it that way, for precisely the reasons Irwin nominates: our fear
of appearing too invested in or excited about anything. It’s all
terribly English, really. Being so relaxed we’re horizontal is a highly
esteemed Australian characteristic, and if the upshot of our commitment
to indifference is a loss of our own passion for the things that really
matter to us, and a disdain for the untrammelled enthusiasm of others,
than so be it.

Are we afraid of failure? This is the classic analysis of those afraid
of trying too hard, but I think what stymies us is more pedestrian: a
fear of the unpredictable and potentially uncomfortable social
situations that could result if people drop roles and abandon lines.
Wild, larger-than-life characters like Irwin - hyper-extraverts - are
unpredictable; you never know what they might say or do. They could ask
you for something you don’t want to give, or beg conflict by saying
something you don’t want to hear. They must be subdued through ridicule
or marginalisation, or frozen out completely to manage our collective
fear of the awkward moment.

Americans have no such fear, and this may partially explain their
unequivocal hero-worship of Irwin. In fact, I suspect the real source of
American’s love-affair with Irwin was not what made him Australian, but
the Americanness of much of his personality. Hyper-extraversion, and its
superlative sidekicks of uncontained passion and enthusiasm, are what
Americans love and admire about themselves. How flattering to see them
emulated by the nation’s good friends Down Under, and in a cute Aussie
accent to boot.

It is perhaps testament to the complexity of the Australian character
that while Irwin’s energy and passion made us anxious, we also admired
it. Many, myself included, couldn’t help but feel terribly fond of the
man. As he told Denton, he was the boy who never grew up, and we
couldn’t help but smile at his boundless enthusiasm and energy,
childlike faith in his invincibility when it came to animal stings or
bites, and his inability to be other than himself or to even waste time
trying.

He was one out of the box, and I know I’m going to miss him like hell.