---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2006-06-06
tag: writings
title: 'Progressive Social Movements: Is the end nigh?'
---
*The challenge for feminists is to beat a system that still stifles
them*

There is a self-flagellatory streak in feminist books these days. The
underlying message is that the biggest problem contemporary women face
is that “feminists” didn’t tell them that they couldn’t “have it all”,
rather than the fact that even in our so-called equal-opportunity world,
they still can’t.

This rush to blame may be a sign of larger and more fundamental - even
fatal - problems affecting the women’s and other progressive social
movements. As Carmen Laurence put it recently on Compass, such movements
have failed to offer an understanding of the nature and purpose of
society to counter the individualistic market-based philosophy of
liberal capitalist countries like the UK, the US and Australia: a
philosophy that says the role of the individual is to compete with
others for access to the means to buy more stuff.

At the heart of the liberal world view is a vision of individuals
competing on a level playing field for the freedom to make whatever
choices they like, as long as these don’t interfere with the similar
freedom of others. This view implies that the unhappiness of any group
must be a consequence of their bad choices: choices for which they have
no one to blame but themselves. They could, and should, have chosen
better.

Enter the politics of informed consent which, in the Liberal world-view,
provides one of the few ways those who’ve made bad choices can escape
blame. From the feminist health movement to the more recent co-option of
feminist health principles by abortion foes, defenders of informed
consent assert that choices are only legitimate if they are made free
from coercion and in the face of substantial understanding of the
relevant facts. Indeed, the claim that women didn’t know because they
weren’t told - and so aren’t to blame for their choices - is at the
heart of post-feminist complaints like Haussegger’s.

But while informed consent is a necessary tool for the protection of
individual autonomy, political movements based on nothing more than the
fostering of individual choice have a slim chance of success, despite
the promotion of this sort of approach by commentators like Miranda
Devine as the basis of a “new feminism”. This is because, “choice to do
what?” will always be the next question that’s asked, and not all
choices are the same. We don’t allow people to sell themselves into
slavery, no matter how informed or voluntary they declare themselves to
be, nor do we have much respect for the mega-rich who freely and
knowledgeably reject all philanthropic appeals.

Another well-worn route out of this conundrum is for progressives to
show the falsity of liberal claims that the gladiatorial contest for
purchasing power takes place on level playing field. However, the
culture wars clearly showed how such an approach can be effectively
castigated for encouraging a “culture of complaint”, a “black-armband”
view of the world or a “victim mentality” in which excuses rather than
action rule the day. This does not mean that progressives can’t, or
shouldn’t, continue to point to the significant gap between the promise
of liberal capitalism and what it delivers. But they should do so in the
knowledge that while negative campaigns may undermine an opponent, they
provide little succour for the alternative. Perhaps this is why the
majority of Australians have granted control of both houses of
parliament to a market-worshipping government while at the same time
telling researchers that Australian society puts too much emphasis on
money and not enough on the things that really matter.

What is the answer? Progressives must make the critique of the market’s
capacity to deliver happiness a first order priority. Once able to meet
the basics of life, additional money doesn’t increase our feelings of
well-being, as the 23% of Australians who’ve already downshifted to a
time-rich and money-poor alternative clearly understand. As well,
progressives must exploit what religion, philosophy and the social
sciences all confirm are powerful sources of human motivation and
happiness - family, community, identity, solidarity, security, trust,
love, creativity, mastery, autonomy and fairness - to articulate an
alternative objective for Australian society. We want to feel good about
ourselves, which entails spending time with family, feeling part of our
communities, acting with integrity and in accordance with the values we
see as implicated in a meaningful life.

We know that what the continental Europeans disdainfully regard as
Anglo-Saxon liberalism is not the answer, and that consumerism has been
a wash-out too. But before we can step off the wheel, we’re going to
need a vision of where we’re headed and someone to show the way. It is
the job of social progressives to articulate a vision and to answer the
all important question of how we can get there from here.