---
assets: ~
categories: writings
excerpt: Late last year, the Lockhart Legislative Review Committee - the Federal Government’s
  own handpicked experts - handed down its recommendations on the fate of stem cell
  research in this country. Among other things, the Committee recommended lifting
  Australia’s ban on so-called “therapeutic cloning”. Having first shelved the report
  on the basis of a cabinet vote, a backbench revolt saw the Prime Minister agree
  to a broader discussion at the first party room meeting after winter break. That
  meeting - otherwise known as Stem Cell D-Day - is today.
link: ''
published: 2006-08-07
title: Stem Cell D-Day
---
Co-authored with Dr Elizabeth Finkel

Late last year, the Lockhart Legislative Review Committee - the
Federal Government’s own handpicked experts - handed down its
recommendations on the fate of stem cell research in this country. Among
other things, the Committee recommended lifting Australia’s ban on
so-called “therapeutic cloning”. Having first shelved the report on the
basis of a cabinet vote, a backbench revolt saw the Prime Minister agree
to a broader discussion at the first party room meeting after winter
break. That meeting - otherwise known as Stem Cell D-Day - is today.

The flashpoint of the debate will be therapeutic cloning. This type of
cloning is not about copying people, but copying their cells.

What is the potential of this technique? Imagine Mary, a child with
leukaemia, needs a bone marrow graft to replace her diseased cells. One
of her skin cells would be cloned to generate a primitive embryo. The
cloning technique involves inserting the skin cell’s nucleus - which
runs the genetic program for skin - into a donated human egg that’s own
nucleus has been removed. Being inside the egg resets the program of the
skin’s nucleus to begin dividing. Several days later embryonic stem
cells will be extracted; a process that will halt all further
development. The matched graft would significantly raise Mary’s odds of
survival.

Mary’s therapy has actually already been achieved in mice. In 2002, a US
researcher used the technique to give mice a perfectly matched bone
marrow transplant. “Oh to be a mouse”, said the late Christopher Reeve.
George Daley now has a license to use therapeutic cloning to make
matched human bone marrow cells.

Alternatively if Mary suffered from motor neuron disease or juvenile
diabetes, such cells would provide faithful models of the disease to
test new drugs. The promise of therapeutic cloning has already
galvanized research in the UK and the US where highly esteemed
scientists are working for better treatment of bone marrow disease,
motor neuron disease, diabetes and the crippling disease amyotropic
lateral sclerosis. Other countries also have the legislative freedom to
pursue this research: Canada, New Zealand, Sweden, Belgium, Spain,
Finland, Israel, Singapore and China.

Many in Howard’s party are vehemently opposed to the technique. They
believe it is morally repugnant to create and destroy an embryo. They
also vehemently contest the true therapeutic potential of the technique.
Others in the party believe the moral imperative to advance research
that could alleviate human suffering trumps concerns about the status of
an embryo transiently created from a skin cell.

The Lockhart Review sought to cut through this debate and indicate a way
forward. Lockhart argued that the views of different communities on the
moral acceptability of therapeutic cloning are not reconcilable, and,
because research in this area is in its early stages, there is no point
in second-guessing its long-term prospects. Given this, the Review
advised that the debate must shift to the proper role of governments in
managing such radical moral disagreement.

It is this question, not irreconcilable ones about the moral status of
the embryo or the ultimate medical benefits of the science, that should
be at the centre of today’s party room debate about the fate of
embryonic stem cell research in Australia.

The Lockhart Review advocated the Government adopt a compromise
approach. Rather than allow the moral values of one section of the
community to ride roughshod over those held by the rest, it urged the
government to capitalise on areas of community consensus by, for
instance, continuing its ban on reproductive cloning. Where moral views
were hopelessly divided, it supported a licensing system where both
institutional ethics committees and a government appointed committee of
experts examine each research proposal individually.

This is the type of regulatory framework that has been in place since
2002 to control research using surplus embryos from fertility clinics.
Thus far nine licences, all of limited duration, have been issued, five
for improving fertility treatment, four for stem cell research. The
licensing requirements are stringent, with researchers needing to
justify the purpose of the research and the number of embryos required.

In areas of radical moral disagreement, the proper role of government is
to pursue meaningful compromise. The existing ban on therapeutic cloning
serves as a legal brick wall. The Lockhart committee recommended
replacing the wall with a hurdle, high enough to block proposals of
questionable merit, but low enough to allow those of great worth to get
over.

In a pluralist democracy like Australia, the Federal Government must
either accept the Lockhart recommendations, or allow our elected
representatives to cast a conscience vote on the issue.

*Dr. Elizabeth Finkel is a former biochemist and author of the
prize-winning book by ABC books.*