---
assets: ~
excerpt: Once upon a time, there were two men.  The first, Gary, had a child in a
  shaky marriage. The couple separated, but then reconciled. When Patti discovered
  she was pregnant, both knew the child could be that of the lover she took during
  their time apart. Patti agreed to put Gary’s name on the birth certificate, and
  Gary pledged to love and raise the child - Gary Jr - as his own. But when the marriage
  ended, Patti asked the court to deny Gary further access to the boy on the grounds
  that he was not the child’s biological father. Gary fought back, seeking to maintain
  contact and both rights and obligations to the child. Ultimately, however, the court
  held that as “third parties” neither he - nor his parents - had any entitlement
  to a relationship with the small child.
link: ''
published: 2006-12-17
tag: writings
title: Are Fathers Parents or Progenitors?
---
Once upon a time, there were two men.

The first, Gary, had a child in a shaky marriage. The couple
separated, but then reconciled. When Patti discovered she was pregnant,
both knew the child could be that of the lover she took during their
time apart. Patti agreed to put Gary’s name on the birth certificate,
and Gary pledged to love and raise the child - Gary Jr - as his own. But
when the marriage ended, Patti asked the court to deny Gary further
access to the boy on the grounds that he was not the child’s biological
father. Gary fought back, seeking to maintain contact and both rights
and obligations to the child. Ultimately, however, the court held that
as “third parties” neither he - nor his parents - had any entitlement to
a relationship with the small child.

The second man, Liam, was married for four years. After separating from
his wife he sporadically paid child support for his three children.
Several years later Liam took a paternity test that showed his eldest
child was the only one biologically related to him, enabling much of his
debt for unpaid child support for all three children - none of whom
speak to him any longer - to be cancelled. Still not content, Liam
launches a suit against his ex-wife for damages caused by her “deceit”,
including financial losses related “to the time he had spent with, and
money he had spent on, the children under the mistaken belief that he
was their father.”

My response to these stories includes feelings of pity and of admiration
for Gary, and of moral revulsion for Liam (not to mention Patti). Yet
while Gary languishes in obscurity, Liam has become the poster-child for
parts of the Father’s Rights Movement: the man who story is intended to
alchemise our pity and moral outrage into table-thumping demands for
systemic change to the family law system.

However, if the media’s coverage of the two cases is anything to go by,
I may be alone in moral assessment of both men’s actions. While Gary’s
case has been virtually ignored by the, every step of Liam’s journey
through the courts has been catalogued by a panoply of mostly male
journalists whose indignant hearts appear to beat as one with his.
Regularly referred to as a “cuckold”, and the children he has parented
from birth as those “fathered” by “his wife’s lover”, such hacks appear
unable to resist photographing Liam in tragic poses: head bowed and hand
slapped across face, or looking wistfully into the distance at what
might have been.

What might have been? An alternative - and morally balanced universe -
would have told a different story about Gary and Liam. Gary’s story
might have provided growing evidence of men’s recognition of the
critical role they do and should play in the lives of children; not as
sperm donors or walking wallets, but committed hands-on parents. The
rallying of Father’s Rights Groups behind Gary would have reinforced the
message from such groups that fathers matter in the lives of children,
and that the role of law and policy is to assist married men to actively
parent their children and to maintain their relationship with them in
the unhappy event of relationship breakdown.

In contrast, the media and Father’s Rights Activists in this alternative
universe would largely ignore Liam’s case. Such groups, strengthened by
the inclusion in their ranks of adoptive fathers and men parenting
children born from donor insemination, would be appalled by the cost of
Liam’s legal manoeuvrings to the children who call him “dad”. Joining
with the Child Support Agency to urge that parents in such situations to
“think about the impacts on their children”, both groups would judge
Liam harshly for elevating his desire for retributive justice against
his ex-wife above the viability of his paternal relationship with his
children. To avoid such cases in the future, they would call for
Australian law to consistently define fatherhood in social, rather than
biological, terms.

The closest thing to love is hate, and marriage can be a dirty game.
Infidelity in relationships where faithfulness is expected or agreed to
is wrong, no matter who does the deed (though statistics remind us that
men - not women - are most often the culprits)) But how much tarring and
feathering should innocent dependants be asked to wear to assuage the
pride or deepen the hip pocket of either party?

In my alternative moral universe every person dignified with the title
“adult” would know when enough is enough.