---
assets: ~
excerpt: '*Pregnancies Don’t Need Support, Women Do*  Anyone who followed the debate
  on RU486, and understood the complex politics surrounding it, knew it was coming:
  a quid pro quo for the Health Minister to soften the blow of losing his powers to
  deny Australian women access to RU486. It came last Thursday: a $51 million dollar
  package for two [pregnancy support measures]() a new counselling hotline and Medicare
  rebate. Then came the story of a push in Victoria to remove abortion from the Crimes
  Act.'
link: ''
published: 2006-03-06
tag: writings
title: Women need counselling, not coercion
---
*Pregnancies Don’t Need Support, Women Do*

Anyone who followed the debate on RU486, and understood the
complex politics surrounding it, knew it was coming: a quid pro quo for
the Health Minister to soften the blow of losing his powers to deny
Australian women access to RU486. It came last Thursday: a $51 million
dollar package for two [pregnancy support measures]() a new counselling
hotline and Medicare rebate. Then came the story of a push in Victoria
to remove abortion from the Crimes Act.

Counselling is like motherhood: something few want to oppose. But the
truth is that some counselling isn’t what is seems. Far from improving
the quality of women’s decisions, mental health or lives, biased
counselling - funded by the Commonwealth to the tune of $350,982 - can
cause lasting damage to women’s lives and mental health. Sadly, it
appears that this is precisely the sort of “counselling” the Federal
Government has in mind.

There is one key feature that attaches to all legitimate counselling:
the commitment to fostering a woman’s autonomy. At the heart of all
ethical medical practice, you will find the key value of autonomy, the
Greek root of which means “self-rule”. Why? Because only people free to
direct and govern their lives according to their own values are
recognised by others as having what Australian philosopher Robert Young
describes as “the dignity that moral agency bestows”.

There are three reasons to doubt that the Government’s proposed measures
will foster women’s autonomy and protect their dignity. The first is
that, as their title makes clear, they are designed to support
pregnancies, not women. If pregnancy maintenance, not quality
decision-making, is the name of the game, it’s hard to see how factually
accurate and non-directive support and advice is on the cards.

Ditto the undisguised aim of both measures: to reduce the abortion rate.
The Government says they are necessary to address Australia’s high
abortion rate. At the news conference launching the plan, the Prime
Minister said: “We don’t like the number of abortions. We think it’s too
high.” How can a service designed to stop women having abortions (how
else to reduce the abortion rate?) provide impartial, non-directive
advice? How can such a service meet the ethical requirement of promoting
women’s autonomy? Won’t the successful tenderer be evaluated on how well
it achieves the Government’s aims of reducing the abortion rate? If so,
how can we expect this service to do anything other than discourage
women from choosing abortion?

This worry is exacerbated by the Government’s insistence that religious
organisations will be eligible to tender for the telephone helpline
contract. While abortion service-providers and counsellors working in
abortion clinics have been seen as having a “conflict of interest” that
renders them incapable of providing impartial, non-directive support and
referral for all three options available to pregnant women - abortion,
adoption and continuing - religious providers are not. This beggars
belief, particularly given the widespread acceptance of medical
conscientious objection not just to providing abortion services, but
referring women to someone who will.

Moral conflicts of interest are as real as financial ones, and there is
little doubt that a tender process truly committed to identifying a
service committed to fostering women’s autonomy would rule out
applicants with religious or philosophical objections to abortion.

The truth is that if the Government wants to reduce the abortion rate,
the most ethical and effective approach is to tackle unplanned
pregnancies. No woman wants to be pregnant when she feels unable -
because she is unemployed, homeless, single, living in a violent home or
is just a teenager herself - to be a good and responsible parent to the
child. This makes government support for education and contraception
access programs not only the most effective way to lower the abortion
rate, but - because it supports women to achieve shared aims - the only
ethical one.

Pregnancies don’t need support, women do. They also need respect. The
aim of any legitimate counselling service must be to foster women’s
autonomy, not to achieve government aims such as reducing the number of
abortions or increasing the birthrate. Using women as a means to
government or church ends is not just unethical, it may lead to women
being deceived or induced - perhaps even coerced through false
information or an absence of timely advice - into having an unwanted
child: not a recipe for happy families.

If a financial conflict of interest is seen to render those involved
with abortions ineligible to provide impartial advice, support and
referral for all three options with an unplanned pregnancy, a moral
conflict of interest surely rules religious and pro-life providers out,
too.

At a minimum, the potential for abuse of trust must be acknowledged. It
is likely that women will assume that neutrally named services,
particularly when promoted with the Australian coat of arms, will
support them to make a choice consistent with their situation and
values. If the agency running the helpline has a religious or
philosophical objection to abortion, women need to be informed of this
on all advertising materials.

They must also be told it when they ring. And offered an alternative
number for a legitimate service. One that has no other agenda than
assisting her to make the choice that is right for her, and no religious
beliefs to limit the support they provide for her to carry it out.