---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2006-07-06
tags: ~
title: Rewind
---
The recent “Camilla” incident streamed from the Big Brother house
several weeks ago renewed controversy about the show’s suitability for
free-to-air TV.

Of course for some, the issue was decided long ago. Victorian Family
Council Secretary Bill Muelenberg, Family First Senator Senator Steven
Fielding and Queensland Nationals MP Paul Neville have long condemned
the show as sleazy and dangerously sexually licentious. In the wake of
the weekend’s “incident”, this conga line was joined by the leaders of
both major parties. The Opposition Leader lamented the show’s treatment
of young women, while the Prime Minister asked Channel Ten to take the
“stupid program” off air.

Are calls for media self-censorship evidence of feminist inroads into
the sensibilities of the nation’s leaders, the relentless crusade of
Christian moralists to control what the rest of us see, hear and read,
or just plain commonsense? Was the two minutes that shook the world in
the collective bedroom of the Big Brother household evidence of the
depravity of today’s male youth, or just how far - in the sexual
politics stakes - they’ve come?

Deciding requires us to disentangle the varied business and moral
mandates in play. From a commercial point of view, it’s arguable that
Channel 10 had little choice but to follow the advice of media studies
academic Catherine Lumby and evict the men from the house for being on
the wrong side of what Lumby described as the line dividing “sexual
behaviour and sexual assault”. The recent axing of Big Brother Adults
after pressure from Coalition MPs proved the not inconsiderable sway of
the Christian right in this country, and appeasing them by turfing the
men out and inviting the Queensland police to investigate made good
business sense.

The network’s response, however, says little about whether the behaviour
of the two men merited condemnation on moral grounds. Lumby said the men
were guilty of sexual assault, while Communications Minister Helen
Coonan charged them with objectifying women. But in all the frenetic
tut-tutting that surrounded the case, few have considered whether the
young men’s response to Camilla’s objection to their unquestionably
inappropriate behaviour shows a solid understanding of the key feminist
principle that whatever she wears and wherever she goes, when a woman
says “no”, she means “no”.

The footage confirms Big Brother’s deliberate construction of sexually
charged situations that the young people of the house are expected to
smoothly and consistently negotiate before a national audience. In the
moments leading up the incident, Camilla - wearing underwear and a
cleavage-revealing skivvy - slides into John and Ash’s bed. A moment
later, John’s arm is pressing her to the bed, while Ash appears to whip
out his genitals and rub them in her face. This part of the story we
know.

What has received less attention is what comes next. Camilla vocally
objects to what is happening to her and the lads withdraw, immediately
and fully.

There is no question that John and Ash’s forceful act of restraint and
sexual domination of

Camilla should not - without her express and prior permission - have
taken place. For this, they owed her a sincere and profound apology.
However, it seems an act of deliberate blindness to ignore the alacrity
with which the men responded to her insistence that they back off.
Surveys continue to show a disturbing number of men continue to believe
women really mean “yes” when they say “no”. John and Ash, however, don’t
appear to be among them.

Maintaining consent as the key arbiter of what constitutes assault or
otherwise deviant behaviour is critical to preserving the liberation of
female desire and sexuality for which second-generation feminists
strove. Women can fancy a threesome, dig S& M or fantasise about
gerbils. As long as they are competent, and freely give their consent,
neither the label “victim” or “slut” should apply.

The opposing point of view - endorsed by an uneasy colation of radical
anti-porn feminist and Christian crusaders - is that some (mostly male)
sexual behaviour is intrinsically aggressive or otherwise sinful, and
needs to be curtailed, for the sake of women and/or civilisation as a
whole.

We can laugh at the arrogance and narrow-mindedness of such views, but
the barbarians are at the gate. Maintaining individual control over what
we watch, the privacy of our bedroom and how we define and express our
desires and capacities as men and women requires that we consistently
affirm, in art as well as in life, the important of consent in defining
what we do - and is done to us — as right or wrong.