---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2006-10-13
tags: ~
title: "There Shouldnâ\x80\x99t Be One Law for Religions, Another for the Rest"
---
Retiring sex discrimination commissioner Pru Goward’s parting comments
on the unfettered capacity of the nation’s religious institutions to
practise gender discrimination were the most interesting - and
contentious - of her tenure.

Despite the generous support of such institutions by the Australian
Government through tax exemptions and funding for religious schools, the
institutional and liturgical practices of the church show blithe
disregard for federal laws that prohibit the unfair treatment of
Australian women on the basis of their gender, marital or pregnancy
status. “It’s a huge law-free zone,” said Goward.

Her contrasting of the nation’s intolerance of practices that perpetuate
inequality between the races, but laissez-faire attitude to parallel
ones that allow gender inequity, is both acute and timely. Most
Australians would agree that a religion that claimed that race was a
legitimate ground for denying a congregant a leadership role in the
church, or for physically segregating him from others during services
was immoral, and should be unlawful.

Yet, both victims of race and gender discrimination suffer attenuated
aspirations and opportunities. Why should the law give a privilege to
the rights of believers to be free of racial discrimination, but cry
“religious tolerance” whenever complaints of gender discrimination are
made? How can a nation that allows the nation’s churches to deny equal
opportunity to women assert that gender equity is a fundamental Aussie
value?

One reason Australian lawmakers might see sexism, but not racism, as a
lesser evil than the restriction of religious freedom is the integral
role sexism plays in the Abrahamic religions: Judaism, Islam and
Christianity.

Race was a potent concept before and around the time of Jesus, but it
was a voluntary category defined by the individual’s choice of faith.
The contemporary understanding of race - as a set of inalterable and
unchosen physical characteristics - does not feature in the Torah or the
Gospels as a category that either inherently limits or expands an
individual’s access to God. In practical terms, this means that not only
does the enforcement of legal prohibitions on racism have little
practical impact on the church’s teachings, but that the scriptures
offer little to defend those who discriminate on grounds of race.

Sadly, this is not the case for gender. While the fictional nature of
much of Dan Brown’s The Da Vinci Code is beyond question, the general
thesis about the determination of the first Christians to suppress the
feminine is correct.

Paul, in particular, seemed determined to ignore Jesus’s more
gender-egalitarian bent and to pursue gentile converts to the new sect
by impressing them with the modesty of Christian women. The ancient
Hebrews bequeathed to the first Christians (most of whom came from pious
Jewish backgrounds) a view of women as unclean creatures with no
independent standing in the eyes of God. For women to be seen by God -
the only way in such cultures for her to acquire social status - they
must maintain dutiful familial relationships with men: fathers,
brothers, husbands. The spinsters, widows and divorcees who lacked such
relationships, or who, once engaged in them, failed to deliver virginity
and later sons, risked being cast out from the community.

There is evidence that such antiquated views of women continue to
influence the contemporary practices of some Jewish, Christian and
Muslim congregations. Whether it’s Orthodox Jews daily thanking God for
not making them women, Muslim schools refusing to hire unmarried women,
or Christian ones dismissing women when they became pregnant, Australian
women of faith are subject to treatment that reflects limited views
about their full humanity and denies them opportunities for no other
reason than that they are female.

Religious leaders are no amateurs when it comes to defending male
privilege in the liturgy and hierarchy. “Our holy books command us to
treat women this way,” they protest, conveniently forgetting the
redundancy of scriptural commandments to stone adulterers, or forcibly
marry rapists to their victims. Alternatively, they argue that if women
weren’t content with second-class citizenship, they’d have fled the
churches long ago.

Would that it were so simple. As the recent expose on ABC’s Four Corners
made clear, the fundamentalist Exclusive Brethren exact high costs -
such as life-long separation from spouses and children - from those who
exit. It is also unclear whether a guarantee of more realistic exit
rights is a just response to unlawful discrimination by religious
orders.

Would we deem “lump it or leave” an acceptable response to Aboriginal
Australians who complained that their church was denying them leadership
positions and demanding they sit in pews at the back? Or would we feel
that Aborigines have a right to membership in a church free of
institutionalised racism.

Sexism is just as eviscerating to the dignity, self-esteem, aspirations
and opportunities of women as racism is to people of colour. It was the
recognition of this fact that led to the passage of the Federal Sex
Discrimination Act in 1984. More than 20 years later, it is high time
its provisions were fully enforced.