---
assets: ~
published: 2006-11-14
tags: ~
title: It Matters Who You Are, and Where You Come From
---
Should arguments stand or fall on their merit? Or is it critical that
media consumers get full, accurate and relevant information about who is
providing facts, or offering opinion, about matters of public interest?.

It may be nice to think the quality of ideas - not those who promulgate
them determines their persuasiveness, but the reality is more
complicated. A pro- nuclear argument made by a mining magnate will be
evaluated differently to the exact same one made by an environmental
activist, professor of nuclear physics, or the CEO of International
Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War.

And rightly so. The credentials of individuals and organsisations
provide us with important clues about the expertise and motives of those
seeking to influence us. They give us the chance to evaluate for
ourselves whether an individual or organisation’s contribution is
influenced by memberships, affiliations or sources of funding and, if we
believe it is, to adjust the weight we give to those views accordingly.

Motivations are complex and hidden. Political parties regularly discount
the possibility that corporate donors purchase influence over party
policies. Thinktanks poo-poo the idea that their spiritual or financial
relationships with religious, political or corporate donors influence
their views on matters of public interest, insisting that instead donors
simply give to those who share their views.

But unless full, accurate and relevant information on these
relationships are disclosed, how can we make up our own minds?

We can’t. And the truth is that some who seek to influence us believe
that some ways of identifying themselves increase the credibility of
their message. Regrettably, on the basis of this belief, some provide
credentials and make disclosures that are at incomplete, misleading or
irrelevant.

Editorial space is preferred over advertising space by those who want to
get their message across, as was clearly revealed by the Cash for
Comment saga. The reason is simple. The views of journalists, academics,
scientists and doctors are presumed to be the consequence of sustained
and dispassionate analysis, not prior commitments, loyalties or the hope
of financial advantage. This impartiality gives credibility to their
views unavailable to those with known religious, corporate or political
commitments, or who stand to make money from opinion being shaped one
way instead of another.

This may explain why some organizations choose scholarly sounding names
like “centres”, “institutes” and "think-tanks, The reality, however, is
that unlike academics, the staff of such organizations will not be
required to have advanced degrees, nor adhere to the rigorous standards
for quality research required to publish in academic journals.

Many think-tanks are reticent about disclosing who funds them, and their
employees can be slack in ensuring past political affiliations are a
consistent feature of their bios. We do know that Philip Morris and BAT
donated to the Institute of Public Affairs, which takes the view that
passive smoking is not based on science. Director of the Sydney
Institute, Gerard Henderson does not always disclose, when he opines
about the Australian political scene, that he spent two years as John
Howard’s chief of staff.

Academic gloss is not the only quality sought by those seeking
influence. A connection with the “little guy” - community-based or
grass-roots activists - also lends credibility to messages the big end
of town (corporate Australia, political parties or the churches) want us
to hear.

[According to
Sourcewatch](http://www.sourcewatch.org/index.php?title=Institute_of_Public_Affairs#Front_Groups),
The Institute of Public Affairs contributed to the establishment of a
number of front groups, including the Australian Environment Foundation,
which campaigns for weaker environmental laws and Independent
Contractors of Australia, which campaigns for an end to workplace safety
laws and the deregulation of the labour market.

Such “astroturfing” (the creation or nurture of individuals or groups
that falsely inflate “public” opinion) may be behind the newfound
popularity amongst longstanding pro-life organizations and activists of
re-badging themselves for every campaign they undertake against abortion
and embryonic stem cell research. Well-known anti-choice activists and
several women with links to Opus Dei recently became directors of
Women’s Forum Australia, which asserts feminist grounds for opposing the
drug regulator’s control over RU486, transparent advertising
requirements for pregnancy counselling organizations and stem cell
research. The Coalition Against the Decriminalisation of Abortion seems
like a new pro-life grass roots organisation, but shares a mailing
address with Catch the Fire Ministries. In its first year of operation,
Cadoa found around $34,000 to fund anti-decriminalisation newspaper ads.

What can be done? The code of ethics binding journalists requires them
to be honest, to refrain from suppressing or distorting relevant facts,
to refuse to allow personal interest, or any belief, commitment,
payment, gift or benefit to undermine their independence and to disclose
conflicts of interest that affect - or could be seen to affect - their
independence.

Perhaps the time has come for other media participants to be asked to
conform to similar ethical standards. Anyone who really wishes to
conduct their dealings transparently shouldn’t find it too hard to work
out what disclosures are required.

Beyond this, the best the public and decision-makers can do is to
approach the credentials and disclosures offered by media players with
skepticism. They may be complete, accurate and relevant. Then again,
they may not.