---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2006-09-20
title: Legal Safeguards Can Make Euthanasia A Legitimate Option
---
*People should have the right to make choices about their own deaths.*

Earlier this week Senator Amanda Vanstone re-opened the euthanasia
debate by opining in a newspaper interview that it was inhumane to
deprive Australians of “sane sensible and humane euthanasia laws”.

The arguments the palliative care movement make against euthanasia are
similar to those made by the anti-choice movement against abortion. This
is unsurprising , given the religious origins of both schools of though
of late, both have taken what one scholar describes as a decidedly
“secular turn”.

Both movements argue that the only reason why those they claim to
represent - women and terminally ill patients - choose as they do is
because both groups lack adequate knowledge of other alternatives. If
only woman knew about Centrelink parenting payments, and the terminally
ill recognised the improvements in pain management, the demand for
abortion and physician assisted suicide would disappear.

Both movements also question the decision-making competence of those
choosing abortion and physician-assisted suicide. Female pregnancy
hormones and the poor physical and mental health status of terminally
ill patients, not to mention the stress of crisis decision-making, are
deemed legitimate reasons to doubt the rationality - and disregard the
choices - of those pursuing control over their bodies and their deaths.
Palliative care providers, argues a recent article in Palliative
Medicine, deem all patients who “think that their life is irretrievably
bad” to be “wrong”.

Finally, both advocacy groups suggest that the availability of more
options has the counter-intuitive outcome of reducing choice. The mere
availability of abortion and physician-assisted suicide, the argument
runs, coerces women and terminally ill-patients to “choose it” so as to
avoid burdening others with their need. Real choice, it is claimed,
requires the continued criminalisation of abortion and
physician-assisted suicide so that more legitimate options like adoption
and palliative care can flourish.

So what is the truth? Surveys across the western world, including
Australia, clearly show support for a right to die. A 2002 Gallup poll
found 72% of Americans supported doctor-assisted suicide for those with
terminal illnesses, while in the same year 70% of Australians were found
to be in favour of giving terminally ill and severely suffering people a
choice about the timing and method of their death.

Data from Oregon suggests that the most frequently given reasons for
choosing physician-assisted suicide by the approximately 30 people who
die this way every year are loss of autonomy" (87%), “loss of dignity”
(80%) and “loss of the ability to enjoy the activities that make life
worth living” (84%). This data, which suggests that mental rather than
physical suffering is the main driver of decisions to die, undermines
the assertion of anti-euthanasia forces that the effectiveness of
modern-day palliative methods obviates the need for legal reform.

Such figures also undercut claims that the legal freedom to die would
exert the greatest coercive pressure on those lacking options other than
death: namely, the ill-educated and those too poor to afford palliative
care. The overwhelming majority of Oregonians seeking physician-assisted
suicide were highly educated and well off. Indeed, 86% were enrolled in
hospice care at the time of their suicides, while only 2 of the 208
people who have used the legislation so far were uninsured.

There are some values that palliative care and right to die advocates
share. These include a belief in the importance of reducing human
suffering and a distaste for the over-medicalisation of the dying
process.

However, disagreements between the two groups are profound. They include
theoretical disputes about the legitimacy of death as a choice as well
as more empirically-based spats about the competence and capacity of the
terminally ill to make adequately informed decisions, and the likely
effect of making physician-assisted suicide a legal choice. Palliative
care advocates see decriminalisation as an invitation to what Melbourne
writer Juliette Hughes (Opinion, 13/7) recently described as a culture
of death that would enable the preferences of greedy relatives and
stingy hospital bureaucrats to be privileged above those of vulnerable
patients. In contrast, advocates for physician-assisted suicide believe
safeguards can be put in place to protect patient-autonomy and reduce
the risks of involuntary euthanasia: risks currently managed in
secretive and ad hoc ways. One survey found that while 30% of all
Australian deaths involving a medical decision designed to end the
patient’s life, only 4% of these decisions were in response to a direct
request from the patient.

Some Australians speed and drive drunk. Yet few would seriously moot the
criminalisation of driving as a solution to this undeniably serious
problem.

Instead, as we do to minimise the risk of irresponsible driving to self
and others, we must move to enact sophisticated regulatory and
compliance regimes around end of life decisions. Ones that will offer
those of us who meet threshold conditions for competence to exercise our
reason and our values when it comes to critical decisions about our
bodies, our lives and our deaths.