---
assets: ~
categories: writings
excerpt: |-
  Do multiculturalism and feminism mix? What about feminism and
  religious freedom?
link: ''
published: 2006-10-09
title: 'Multiculturalism and Feminism: Do they Mix?'
---
*This article ran in the Sydney Morning Herald essay series celebrating
the paper’s 175th anniversary.*

Do multiculturalism and feminism mix? What about feminism and
religious freedom?

One could be forgiven for having doubts. In a range of pluralist,
liberal states - Australia included - pockets of cultural and religious
minorities engage in practices that express limited views about the full
humanity of women, and undermine equity between the sexes. From the
insistence of pockets of Somali immigrants in the US on “circumcising”
their infant girls, the refusal of parts of the Anglican and Catholic
Churches to ordain women and the appeal to customary law by some
Aboriginal men to justify child marriage and marital rape, some
religious and cultural sub-communities persevere with practices that
express particular views about “proper” roles for women rejected - in
theory if not in practice - by the majority. When criticised, the
defence that tends to be offered, nearly always by a male authority
figure, is that what is being done is an inextricable part of “our
culture”.

The dilemma cannot be solved by a simple appeal to rights. This is
because the right to pursue one’s own conception of the good life free
from discrimination on the grounds of culture and of gender are
important moral rights. Which should trump the other when they conflict?
Political rights are similarly impotent in the face of this conflict,
with many human rights conventions and anti-discrimination protocols
enshrining gender equity as well as freedom of culture and religion. The
seven core international human rights treaties, for example, include
those that guarantee the right of self determination to all without
regard to religion, as well as those that affirm the equal rights of men
and women.

So what should be done when the values we hold about cultural and
religious diversity, and our beliefs about equality between the sexes,
collide? A number of Australian politicians have recently made their
views clear. Members of minority cultures or religions can either do as
we do (or say we do) when it comes to gender equity, or go home. “If a
person wants to live under Sharia law there are countries where they
might feel at ease”, Treasurer Peter Costello recently informed
Australia’s Muslim minority. “But not Australia”. In a speech to the
Sydney Institute earlier this year, Victorian MP Andrew Robb argued that
the successful integration of first and second generation Muslims into
Australia was dependant on these Australians “demonstrat[ing] their
comittment” to, among other things, the “Australian value” of equality
between the sexes.

Some supporters of multiculturalism - many of whom are feminists - have
taken umbrage at such remarks, which have been interpreted as
thinly-veiled racism against Australian Muslims. Certainly it was the
first time many Australian feminists heard the fair, fat and fifty-ish
men who run the nation even mention the word feminism, little less in
such impassioned and unequivocal tones.

Yet, beneath this discomfort may have lurked another: one grounded in
the sure knowledge that however unjust the discrimination some minority
groups suffer (the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission handled
167 complaints of race discrimination in 2004~~05), such groups may also
perpetrate injustice~~ systematically and unapologetically - against
“their” girls and women. Whether it’s Muslim parents forcing their
daughters overseas for an arranged marriage with an (often far older)
co-religionist, Orthodox Jewish males thanking God daily for not making
them women, or leaders of the Southern Baptist Convention instructing
female congregants to “submit themselves graciously to the servant
leadership of their husbands” and accept their ordained role of
“managing the household and nurturing the next generation,” culture and
religion are regularly used as defences for practices that demean,
deprive, limit and otherwise oppress women.

Ironically, at the same time as girls and women are burdened by the
patriarchal attitudes of traditional religious and cultural communities,
they are also seen as responsible for their preservation and
perpetuation. According to one American study, the parents of young
migrant women saw their daughters as more responsible than their sons
for the positive representation and perpetuation of their culture and
consequently legitimately subject to parental control when it came to
what they wore, their participation in extracurricular and social
activities, their future choices about education and employment and even
their decisions about when and who to marry. While some girls openly or
covertly flouted such restrictions, others submitted, despite what they
admitted were high psychic, social and/or material costs. Philosopher
Susan Okin tells a story of an Indian student facing a forced marriage
that would preclude her graduation from high school. While the 17-year
old admitted that her parents’ decision had “messed up” her dreams and
plans, leaving her “tormented”, she bristled at her teacher’s suggestion
that she might resist. “In our religion, we have to think of our parents
first…I will do it the Muslim way”.

For Okin, arguably the 20th century’s most eminent female philosopher,
one solution to the clash between feminism and multiculturalism is to
ensure female members of religious sub-groups have what she calls
“realistic rights of exit”. Liberal pluralist societies like Australia
should only tolerate the rights of minority groups to discriminate
against women when those women are truly free to respond to such
discrimination - and the more limited life aspirations and achievements
they entail - to leave the group, and build an alterative life
elsewhere. Small-l liberal states that do not guarantee this freedom to
all their citizens are guilty of failing to protect women’s moral right
to choice and control over their lives.

But the right to escape a community that is oppressive is not enough.
Gender-discriminatory cultures and religions have a profound impact on
women’s beliefs about their legitimate entitlements in this life. If
girls grow up hearing, as they do if they attend some private
fundamentalist Christian schools, that their failure to accept a
subordinate and obedient role in the home leaves the “doors open to
Satan”, their opportunities to exit are significantly undermined. This
is because, to rephrase the Rocky Horror Show’s Dr. Frank-N-Furter, if
you can’t see it, you can’t be it. As a consequence, asserts Okin, where
multicultural practices eviscerate the self-esteem necessary for girls
and women to develop their own values and plans, the State is well
within its bounds to outlaw them. This is particularly the case because
the alternative - that oppressed women can either “lump it or leave” -
not only deprives women of the opportunity to participate in and enjoy
the positive aspects of their cultures, it more or less ensures the
entrenchment in such cultures of gender-oppressive attitudes and
behaviour. After all, if the women who object to them have no other
option but to leave, it’s hard to see from where the force for change
will come.

An emphasis not just on the obligation of liberal states to equip girls
and women from minority cultures to exit, but to ensure the conditions
exist for them to stay, is likely to draw fierce resistance from some
minority cultural and religious groups. The leaders of such groups may
brand as culturally imperialist claims that particular practices (like
distinctive and highly restrictive female dress and education
emphasising traditional gender roles and sexual morality) are oppressive
to women, and insist that “their” women freely choose to engage in them.
Where practices less open to interpretation are at issue - like female
genital mutilation, or forced child marriages - they may argue that
cultural expression and survival must take priority over gender
equality.

Philosopher Ayelet Shachar has observed that “a disproportionate share
of the costs of multiculturalism” is born by the most vulnerable groups
in the community: children, women and homosexuals. Shachar’s point,
obvious but often overlooked, is that minority cultural and religious
groups are not homogeneous, but comprise less and more powerful members.
This is something to keep in mind when the most powerful members insist
on majority toleration of a practice that results in the least powerful
copping it sweet.

A focus on exit rights, and the conditions necessary to stay, is not
really as radical as it may sound. When we insist that that the
perpetrators of domestic violence, not the victims, leave the family
home, or applaud court decisions that prohibit religious schools from
firing married women because of their view that they belong at home, we
endorse an Okin-esque view that a truly just society doesn’t just
support its citizens to escape injustice by leaving, but helps them to
fight it, so they can stay.

It’s these battlers, after all, who make the world a more just place for
us all.