---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2006-08-10
title: The Net Brings You The World, But Not Necessarily the Facts
---
It’s enough to make you feel queasy. A recent Harris poll found that
half the American public - up from 36% last year ~~believe Iraq had
weapons of mass destruction at the time of the US invasion. This despite
the fact that final report of the Iraq Survey Group~~ experts handpicked
by the CIA and Pentagon - concluded that Iraq had no deployable
chemical, biological or nuclear weapons in 2003, and had not produced
any since 1991.

Who’s to blame for the escalating factual indifference of much of the
American public? Some commentators - including the author of the Iraq
Survey Group’s report - have been quick to point the finger at the lack
of editorial control exercised over much of the content of the World
Wide Web. “It would be a shame,” said Charles Duelfer, “if one effect of
the power of the internet was to undermine any commonly agreed set of
facts”.

Negative press about the power and reach of the internet is rare.
Instead, we hear much about the democratisation of knowledge enabled by
the capacity of any Tom, Dick and Dana to report news or offer their
analysis of it via personal websites, blogs, forums or contributions to
the proliferation of boutique news and opinion outlets like Crikey and
On Line Opinion.

In some very important ways, net enthusiasts are right. The processes by
which powerful editors in mainstream news organizations determine what
will be spoken about - and by who - lacks transparency and
accountability, while the demand for high-powered credentials curtails
the capacity of the average punter to be heard. By sheer weight of
numbers, the proliferation of media outlets, personal websites, blogs
and forums on the Web offer punters the chance to move beyond passive
consumption of the news towards an active role in shaping it.

But herein lies the rub. Peruse personal websites, blogs and the comment
sections offered by mainstream and boutique news sites, and amid the
sometimes insightful and occasionally amusing commentary are a
significant number of contributions in contention for the
totally-missed-the-point, played-the-person-not-the-ball, mono-rail-mind
or axe-to-grind awards. On one Australian opinion site, a band of “forum
participants” with masculine, often gladiatorial-sounding names, roam
from one female-authored article to the next displaying both significant
anger management and comprehension issues.

Further, despite names suggestive of a certain seriousness of purpose
many personal websites and blogs are little more than cyber-cliques
where the initiated preach to the paranoid in a closed and unfalsifiable
system of proof. “You’re entitled to your own opinion, not your own
facts,” US Senator Patrick Moynihan once noted. But if their recent
“analysis” of a CNN presenter’s concern about the results of the Harris
poll is anything to go by, the folks at Newsbusters.org (“Exposing and
Combating Liberal Media Bias”) appear not to understand the distinction
- crucial for any serious newsman or woman - between fact and value:
“Dontcha love it when liberal media members are confounded by poll
results that don’t fit their view of the world? It drives them so batty
that they suddenly start espousing all manner of absurd rationalizations
they believe explain why so many Americans disagree with them.”

I am not saying that the sort of hierarchical editorial processes
traditionally exercised in newsrooms across the globe are the only one
that can achieve accurate, coherent, pointed and
argumentatively-rigorous content. A recent peer-reviewed study in Nature
found that Wikipedia science entries were nearly as accurate as those
found in Encyclopaedia Britannica (4 errors per article versus 3). This
suggests that a group of enthusiasts and bone fide experts can debate as
equals and eventually arrive at an agreed set of facts. While “Wiki”
creation clearly involves more time and stress for content-creators than
traditional editorial processes (collaboration always does), it offers
readers distinct advantages. Perhaps most valuable is their exposure to
the contested nature of some historical and scientific debates.
Wikipedia entries on Freud and Holocaust Denial, for instance, alert
readers to the controversial nature of the subject, and allow them to
view the history of revisions made to the existing text.

Of course, Wikipedia does not answer to the 24-hour news cycle, making
similar collaborative processes inappropriate for many news
organizations. Moreover, editing opinion and analysis in this way seems
beside the point as, in many instances, the very existence of a blog or
extensive forum participation indicates the topicality and disputed
nature of the subject. What such contributions need is not the sort of
transparent fact-checking process offered by Wikipedia, but a less
visible cogency-verifying one that ensures “good enough” standards of
grammar, diction, logic and pointedness - a.k.a. effective and
respectful communication - are obtained.

This is unachievable, as any one who understands the vast,
uncontrollable wilderness that is the World Wide Web knows. Personal
websites and blogs are just that - personal - and the existing budgets
of mainstream news organizations are likely to preclude the dedication
of additional resources to monitoring dedicated spaces for readers post
comments.

This is not to say that news organizations could and should not make
clear to consumers the differing levels of editorial input they dedicate
to different sections of their output. Forum readers might be informed
that no quality control measures are applied to their content or those
of other contributors, while those clicking through to the letters page
of an online newspaper could be informed of the quality parameters used
to select and edit correspondence.

Doing this may send a message to all internet surfers about the
relationship between the accuracy and communicative value of content,
and different sorts of editorial input. While greater transparency and
accountability are key areas for improvement, the editorial oversight
exercised by mainstream news organizations needs to be recognised as
exercising important quality control over what we see, hear and read
everyday.