---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2006-05-11
title: Time to Break the News to Your Children
---
Should children be told they were conceived by sperm or egg donation?

"Go home, have sex and forget about it. That’s what doctors used to tell
infertile couples in the early days of donor insemination. Donors, too,
were assumed to want, and were provided with, total anonymity as a
condition for their donation. In some instances, no records of the event
- little less non-identifying information about the donor - were kept.

Many Australians would be matter of fact about donor insemination as a
means of creating a family, but stigma still attaches to the procedure.
Persistent confusion between male fertility and potency, and the
insistence of critics that it constitutes infidelity and encourages an
addiction to masturbation is to blame. It also goes some way towards
explaining why the vast majority of the approximately 600 Australian
children born every year from donor sperm, or more rarely eggs or
embryos, are ignorant of their birth origins. Studies suggest that only
about 10% of such children know they are donor-conceived, and that only
20 to 50% of parents plan to let the cat out of the bag at some point in
the future.

The cost of such secrecy is unclear. A handful of mental health
professionals contend that telling traumatises children by disturbing
their identity and their relationship with their social father, and that
the rights of parents to decide if and when to tell ought to be
respected. Most health professionals, however, decry family secrets as
destructive and concur with a vocal group of donor-conceived children
that knowledge of one’s genetic origins and related health information
is a human right. They also point to the damage that can be caused by
accidental disclosure, which can often be ill timed (adolescence appears
to be a bad time to find out) and poorly executed. Melbourne University
researcher Maggie Kirkman tells of donor-conceived adults who have had
their mothers shout “anyway, he’s not really your father” during an
argument, or who recall twigging in biology class that their brown eyes
couldn’t have come from the mating of their two blue-eyed parents.
Relatives and family friends are also a significant disclosure risk
because while few parents tell their offspring, 60% have confided in
another person: a sympathetic friend or maybe their mother. Such
parental confidants, as Kirman sagely notes, “can be expected to pass on
the information, which may eventually reach the ear of the
[donor-conceived] child or adult.”

The proliferation of genetic tests available to Australians as part of
routine healthcare, and changes to legal regimes in many jurisdictions
including the UK, Sweden, the Netherlands, New Zealand and Victoria,
also increase the risk that donor-conceived children will stumble across
the truth. In July, the first crop of donor-conceived children covered
by 1988 Victorian legislation that controversially entitles anonymous
donors to set in train processes that will lead their biological child
to become aware that they were conceived by donor gametes, turn 18.

While we may not agree with all the reasons parents have for delaying or
deciding against disclosure, some may engender our sympathy. Parents
fear their child will be distressed to discover a lack of genetic link
with one or both of them, particularly when, as is the case for some
children, information about the donor is scant. The non-biological
parent - usually the father - may worry his child will love him less
when she learns there is no biological link, or that others will see the
family as less than “normal”. And some parents are simply so
uncomfortable talking about sex, that the prospect of having to explain
to their little ones the more complex reproductive arrangements that
prevailed in their situation daunt them into silence.

In most Western countries, including Australia, the law tends to allow
parents to make their own decisions - according to their own values -
about what is in the best interests of their offspring. The only
exception is when the courts are convinced the parent’s decision is
putting their child’s health and safety at risk. By allowing donors to
set in train processes that will reveal to a child that he or she is
donor-conceived, the State government has asserted what it believes is
in a child’s best interests, and forced the hand of parents of
donor-conceived children in the direction of telling. Whether parental
denial of knowledge about genetic origins really does threaten a child’s
health and safety to a degree that such intervention is justified, or
whether it wrongly establishes donor-conceived families as second-class
ones, is a matter for debate.

The reality for parents of donor-conceived children, however, is that
changing social, medical realities make secret keeping an increasingly
risky proposition. Victorian parents must be mindful that July is around
the corner. If their child is among the first crop of donor-conceived
kids affected by Victoria’s prevailing legal regime, the time to tell is
now.

The Infertility Treatment Authority (ITA) administers the regulation of
infertility treatment in Victoria. The ITA offers information and
support to parents deciding if, when and how to tell children the full
story of their conception. More information about telling can be found
at [www.ita.org.au](http://www.ita.org.au/).