---
assets: ~
published: 2006-02-15
tags: ~
title: 'THE RU486 DEBATE: Death by Amendment'
---
As I write, the Therapeutic Goods Amendment (Repeal of Ministerial
Responsibility for Approval of RU86) Bill 2005 may be sliding towards
defeat in the House of Representatives. Designed to undercut 1996
amendments to the Therapeutic Goods Act that have effectively banned
RU486 and other abortifacient drugs from Australia, the Bill - having
passed through the Senate last Thursday - is now the subject of an
amendment that, if successful, will see the ban remain firmly in place.

The amendments - one introduced by Queensland Liberal Andrew Laming and
a another by NSW Liberal Jackie Kelly - are similar to those advanced in
the Senate by Tasmanian Richard Colbeck and the Northern Territory’s
Nigel Scullion. However, unlike the Colbeck/Scullion amendment, which
attracted minimal support, some members of the Lower House - those in
marginal seats or who relied on Family First preferences at the last
election and have swallowed the ‘we will target you at the next
election’ bluster of pro-life lobbyists - are now seriously considering
throwing their support behind the Laming amendment.

This is a disastrous outcome for those hoping for a quick resolution to
the divisive debate about abortion that has accompanied the introduction
of the Bill. It is also a blow to those hoping that the passage of the
unamended Bill would mean that the Therapeutic Goods Administration
(TGA) would finally get a chance to conduct an impartial and thorough
evaluation of the safety and efficacy of the medication and - should
they give the go ahead - approve the registration of the drug in
Australia.

Successful amendment of the Bill in the Lower House could mean
Australians are in for ‘the abortion debate that time forgot.’ Indeed,
this may be the intention of the amendment. A fax sent to all MPs urges
them to vote for the amendment to ensure an ‘all-encompassing debate’ on
the ‘moral and ethical’ - as well as the ‘safety’ - issues is had this
time, and every time, the TGA approves such drugs.

MPs who vote for the current amendments will condemn the rest of us to
weeks, if not months, of further discussion on RU486 because the amended
Bill must return to the Senate for consideration and a vote. If the
Senate refuses to accept the amended Bill, the House of Representatives
can either insist on their amendment or vote to pass the original. If
they go the former route then the Bill will return to the Senate which
can either vote to accept the amended one or return the original to the
House of Represenatatives … and on and on it goes.

Indeed, the Bill can become a football, passing back and forth between
the two Houses until - unable to reach agreement - both agree to set it
aside, meaning that the current untenable situation, where the Health
Minister decides on drugs like RU486, prevails.

There are both principled and practical problems with the Laming
amendment. While it allows the TGA to evaluate the drug without prior
approval of the Minister - the Parliament would have the power to
override the TGA’s decision to register the drug. This replicates -
indeed multiplies - the current problem of non-experts making critical
decisions based on heaven-knows-what information about life-altering and
life-saving medications.

Liberal MP Danna Vale’s plea to her colleagues to vote against the
current Bill because the drug’s availability could lead to Australia
being dominated by Muslims - a claim not only replete with racist
overtones but also based on the false assertion that making RU486
available will increase the abortion rate - offers an insight into the
sort of ‘logic’ that some MPs might apply to decisions about drugs like
RU486 if given the chance by passing of the amendment.

This principled problem leads to the practical problem already facing
women and patients desperately seeking access to the drug: no
pharmaceutical company is willing to go through the expensive and
time-consuming process of seeking TGA registration for RU486, despite
reams of high-quality evidence that it is both safe and effective. This
is because of the uncertainty created by the current arrangements, which
allow the Minister to veto the TGA’s ruling.

The Laming amendment multiplies this uncertainty by allowing the TGA’s
evidence-based decision to be overturned by Parliament and in so doing,
virtually assures a continued absence of applications by drug companies
to register and market the drug in Australia.

Indeed, if the amendment passes, this could be the situation not just
for abortifacient drugs but for all drugs a small, vociferous minority
deems controversial. The pro-amendment fax states:

RU486 is just the first of many highly controversial drugs which the TGA
will confront over the next decade … The TGA Act 1989 should be amended
to ensure that any controversial drug is not listed in Australia purely
because it is safe and effective.

Drug approval by popular opinion, it seems, is just around the corner.

So close, yet so far. It is the face of Mary Lander - the Australian
woman diagnosed around this time last year with an inoperable brain
tumour who is still struggling to import RU486 to treat her condition -
that swims before my eyes as I consider the possibility that having
passed the Senate with such overwhelming support, this Bill may still be
defeated.

Mary’s face, and faces of the Australian women who - having made the
difficult decision to terminate - are so determined to carry out this
decision without undergoing surgery and without delay (medical abortion
using RU486 can be done earlier than surgical abortion) that they hop on
a plane to New Zealand or the UK to gain access to the drug.

MPs considering the Laming amendment should not kid themselves that it
represents a reasonable compromise position. In fact, the amendments
undermine the fundamental intention of the Bill, which is to remove
medical and scientific decisions from the hands of politicians, and
place them in the hands of the experts at the TGA.

Yes, RU486 procures early non-surgical abortion, but it also has the
capacity to save the lives of countless Australians suffering from
serious diseases. And insofar as MPs believe decisions relating to
abortion needs to be regulated by politicians, they can rest assured
that they are. Every State in Australia has criminal or medical
regulations overseeing abortion and State MPs, like their Federal
counterparts, come up for regular re-election, too. It has been argued
more than once that, given the availability of legal abortion in
Australia, the push by Federal parliamentarians to constrain the
legitimate role of the TGA is illegitimately interfering with State laws
and policies.

Supporting the Laming amendment means affirming the dubious principle
that politicians, rather than medical and scientific experts, are the
right people to make critical decisions about one particular class of
drugs. In practice, it means denying Australian women with an unplanned
and unwanted pregnancy - and other Australian patients with
life-threatening tumours and cancers - ready and affordable access to a
pharmaceutical that is used safely and legally by millions of patients
around the globe each year.

Politicians have been afforded a conscience vote on this issue. They
have a moral obligation to use it to ensure women, in consultation with
their doctors, get one too.