---
assets: ~
published: 2006-12-16
tags: ~
title: Voting Above the Line
---
It turned out to be a storm in a teacup. In response to calls for a
recount from a Victorian ALP confident the Democratic Labor Party’s
number two man had cheated its own candidate of victory, the Victorian
Electoral Commission (VEC) ran the figures again. On Thursday, the
elevation of a third Green’s candidate to the Upper House was announced.

Paul Austin (Opinion 14/12) derided those who feared a second DLP berth
would unleash the same sort of horse-trading that Federal Family First
Senator Steven Fielding has made an art form. But Austin is mistaken. It
is true that the DLP would have been only one of 3 minor parties with
whom Labor could have done deals to pass contested legislation in the
upper house. However, the known reluctance of socially conservative
Premier Steve Bracks to allow a vote to happen on the decriminalisation
of abortion, and the implied willingness of the DLP to unquestioningly
stand as one with the government if it shelved plans to bring the issue
to a vote, made the party a real threat to progress on this and other
women’s reproductive health issues. Indeed, it is possible that the
elected DLP Member Peter Kavanagh retains the power to blackmail the
government into steering clear of the abortion debate, given the
necessity of his vote for the opposition parties to call the government
to account through the inquiry and committee process.

There are two conclusions to be drawn from the DLP seat that might have
been. The first is that sadly, state party functionaries appear
incapable of learning from the glacial mistakes of their Federal
counterparts. Despite the election of Family First’s Steven Fielding to
the Australian Senate in 2004 on preference deals (the party had just
under 2% of the primary vote), Victorian party apparatchiks adopted
similarly misguided tactics in their preferencing of the DLP. Hopefully,
it won’t require an entire electoral cycle of monorail-minded horse
trading of votes on key national issues in exchange for misogynist
health policy and a bit of verbal gay-bashing, to prompt wiser choices
next time around.

Which brings me to the second point: the sobering fact that around 98
per cent of Victorians in Federal elections, and 95 per cent in State
ones, vote above the line. Such electors chose only the party that gets
their primary vote. That party then decide - according to prevailing
priorities, beliefs, relationships, threats and patronage promises - how
their vote will be redistributed in the event its candidate fails to get
over the line.

The cynicism Australians feel about their political leaders makes this
an odd choice. Why give those you neither trust nor respect critical
control over who wields the reigns of power? On the other hand,
reservoirs of contempt may have nowhere to flow but to seas of
indifference. This is certainly the view of the experts who, in the
absence of hard data, speculate that a strong desire for voting to be
quick and painless motivates many to vote above the line. Above-the-line
voting is quick, and reduces the stress surrounding additional
decision-making beyond who we like best.

However, laziness and indifference may not entirely explain our voting
behaviour. Despite the newness of procedures surrounding the election of
the upper house last month, approximately 3 per cent more Victorians
voted below the line than had done in the 2004 Federal election. This
may be because the new ballot paper makes below-the-line voting easier,
requiring voters to rank just five candidates rather than the
approximately 65 needing to be ordered when voting Federally.

I also can’t help wondering whether voters equipped with better
information about what their preferred party intends to do with their
vote might be less inclined to hand over control. While the Victorian
Electoral Act requires group voting tickets to be “prominently
displayed” at polling booths, the VEC does little more than post
preference deals on its website and signpost the manager’s possession of
this information at voting centres. In the future, it might be hoped
that the Bracks government’s laudatory march towards a state-of-the-art
electoral system would see electronic voting offered to all Victorians,
not just the vision-impaired. I fantasise about a computer interface
that would respond to an above-the-line vote above the line with an
information screen explaining the nature of this choice, the preference
arrangements of the party selected, and a “complete your vote” and
“change your vote” option.

It is unfair to attribute the Family First fiasco and DLP debacle to the
single transferable vote and the proportionality it introduces into the
Australian political system. Proportional representation is widely
acknowledged to introduce valuable elements of sharing, disbursing and
limiting power into a democracy that concentrates significant power in
the hands of the majority. Instead, it may be the refusal of the
overwhelming majority of Australian electors to take control of the
entire life course of their vote that results in the elevation of
candidates that few choose - in a meaningfully informed fashion - to
govern us.