---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2006-09-12
tag: writings
title: Burlesque evokes a repressive past, not a liberating present
---
Last Thursday, a number of female scientists stormed out of the dinner
of a government- funded conference on climate change. They were outraged
at the choice of a scantily-clad, all-woman burlesque troupe that
included one performer covered with balloons that conference
participants were invited to pop - as entertainment.

For the academic who drew the news media’s attention to what one
attendee frankly described as “a mess”, the problem was clear. “This is
… supposed to be a gathering of scientists at a government-sponsored
event in an already male-dominated industry where it is hard enough for
a woman to make inroads.” Her comments implied that in this context,
there was little that was amusing, and much that was damaging, in the
raucous display of semi-naked female bodies.

The fishnet-stockinged troupe leader Rebecca Gale, a.k.a “Miss Kitka”,
disagrees. Gale claims that burlesque is not “as degrading and as
backward leading for women” as its critics claim. Not only had she
invited some of the “ladies” to pop her balloons, but the show’s
emphasis on tease rather than nudity, and the fact that all the
performers were neither 18 years old nor “blonde with big boobs” proved
its non-sexist credentials.

Gale might also have pointed to the history of burlesque as further
evidence as its right-on credentials. Originating in the early Victorian
era when tensions between the aristocracy and working-class were high,
burlesque saw performers in outfits considered inappropriate for polite
society mock high-brow entertainment forms as opera, Shakespearean
drama, musicals, and ballet. However, just before the crackdown in the
1930s that saw the genre disappear, burlesque had been reduced to little
more than strip shows where young, rural, poverty-stricken gals got
their kit off for money. Revived as part of the retro- craze of the
1990s, its continued flourishing at the start of the 21st may be
attributable to the rise of “raunch” culture.

Is burlesque sexist? While there is little doubt that on some issues we
can agree to disagree, I’m unconvinced this is one of them. This is
because like the charge of racism, sexism is not a trivial accusation,
but a highly charged moral one that stamps “oppressive” (burdensome,
arbitrary, unjust and/or tyrannical exercise of power) on the accused.
Those making such accusations, in other words, have an obligation to
believe they have truth, not just opinion, on their side.

If any form of sexual entertainment is deemed inappropriate at all
serious work-related events, than in this context burlesque - as well as
pole and belly-dancing - stands condemned. But if burlesque is not just
sexual but sexist, than like minstrel shows in which white actors
blackened their faces and lampooned stereotypical depictions of blacks,
its suitability as entertainment in any context must be questioned.

With all due respect to Ms Gale, it is unclear to me why the fact that
female audience members received the same number of invitations to pop
her balloons defends against the charge of sexism. Would anyone
seriously argue that because the mothers often wrapped and unwrapped the
cloth that crippled their young daughters’ feet, that the ancient
Chinese practice of foot binding was not gender-based oppression?

And while many of us applaud the expansion of forums in which female
physical types other than young, blonde and busty are sexualised,
amending this aspect of our culture’s eroticisation of women does not
necessarily, or on its own, empower us. As well, while the ways in which
women are constructed as hot or not matters, it must at least take equal
place beside the important feminist goal of defending a woman’s right to
occupy public space and garner public respect regardless of whether men
find her horny.

Of course, for some women, the infiltration of burlesque, belly-dancing
and other traditional womanly arts is proof-positive that we no longer
need to worry about this problem. Who else but women supremely confident
that they are taken seriously as citizens and fully-rounded human beings
at home, at school and at work would dare to reintroduce dress and dance
forms that throughout history has been emblematic of the highly
constrained ways women had to arouse recognition, interest and approval
from men. Surely, some young women may feel, the creation of a world in
which women are free to introduce the all-too-human yen to be seen as
desirable in their everyday persona, without fear of misogynist
stereotyping and career death, was what the feminist revolution was all
about.

Well, wresting our fair share of financial and political freedom and
power from men in order to gain greater control of our lives was in
there, too. And while some burlesque performers defend the female nature
of the sexuality expressed by the genre (more foreplay, less
in-your-face T & A) there seems little that’s new in either the glitter
and tassel of the cleavage-focused costumes, or the manner in which the
performers strut around in them. Real sexual freedom, notes author of
Female Chauvinist Pigs Ariel Levy, requires us to figure out what we
internally want from sex instead of mimicking whatever popular culture"
- of any era I might add - “holds up to us as sexy.”

There’s a time and a place for everything, and that includes feeling
sexy and finding someone else hot. Burlesque had its time and place,
too. The challenge for contemporary women is to find ways of being
“sexy” - of inviting desire and desiring - that do not call on gendered
stereotypes from an unequal past, nor succumb to a market-based
universalisation of desire.