---
assets: ~
excerpt: Everyone’s heard of the Mummy Wars. The debate that flies out of the box
  like a bat out of hell every time some dry academic study appears about centre-based
  childcare. Behind all the shouting about sample size, confidence levels and expert
  bias is a shrillness that can only come from women who feel accused of being “bad”
  mummies, or are defending their status as “good” mummies.
link: ''
published: 2007-11-19
tag: writings
title: "Education is not about being a good or bad parent - itâ\x80\x99s about the
  children"
---
*Leslie Cannold and Jane Caro*

Everyone’s heard of the Mummy Wars. The debate that flies out of
the box like a bat out of hell every time some dry academic study
appears about centre-based childcare. Behind all the shouting about
sample size, confidence levels and expert bias is a shrillness that can
only come from women who feel accused of being “bad” mummies, or are
defending their status as “good” mummies.

We don’t acknowledge it, but debates about education funding may be
similar. Seemingly about funding figures drawn from Federal and State
budget papers and high-minded disagreements about the role of the market
in education or education in democracy, the real source of the heat and
light is far more primal: our desperate desire to be seen as good
parents. The proof is in the irrationality, wrong-headedness or sheer
martyred silliness of the responses made to educators, parents, scholars
and politicians who speak about the undeniable - and worsening - funding
inequities between public and private schools. Responses that demonise
those who speak out as dishonest, envious or (our personal favourite)
unethical.

So, let’s see how the facts stack up.

The most common response to complaints about the grossly unfair way the
Feds fund schools is to insist that the public system is the
responsibility of the States. But what has this to do with the moral
problem that 70% of Federal Government funds go to support the 32% of
our kids who attend private schools? After all, a wrong is a wrong, no
matter what gets done afterwards to right it. It is also unclear how
adding in the state contribution undermines the fact that the public
system is under-funded given the result of such mathematics still leaves
some private school students with 62% more resources devoted to their
education than the average student in a public school. A financial
advantage - it must be noted - that the Federal government omits to take
account of when it doles out funds to schools.\
. \
Questionable claims are also made by the “yes, but not us” brigade:
various officialdom from the Catholic schools who - usually as warm-up
for yet another round of successful Federal alms-collecting - imply that
their good work among the underprivileged entitles them to ever-larger
shares of the Federal and State funding pie.

Well, maybe, but a new report by Barbara Preston has found that while
40% of students in government schools are from low income families, this
figure is only 25% in Catholic schools (a figure not dissimilar to the
22% of kids from low income families in other private schools).
According to Preston, the difference is even greater for those students
in very low income families, roughly twice as many of whom can be found
in government schools, as compared to Catholic or other private schools.

And we mustn’t forget the
“I-work~~5-jobs-and-budget-carefully-and-live-in-a-shoe-box-in-middle-of-the-road-while-cleaning-toilets"parental
martyrs. Terrified of any changes to government policy that would
increase fees, this group defends the existing carve-up of Federal funds
despite the fact that~~ were the public system funded properly - such
extreme sacrifice would be unnecessary. Worse, they ignore the fact that
even if they are the winners in the”who is the best parent stakes“,
allowing this victory to compromise the quality of education available
in public schools does nothing more than punish the most disadvantaged
kids for the supposed sins of their parents. We hope that the Australian
debate about education funding has not yet reached the stage where any
participant truly believes that only the children of”good" parents merit
a decent education.

And last, but not least, is the non-sensical claim that parents who pull
their kids from the public system are doing it a favour, as taxpayers
couldn’t afford the price tag of quality education for all Australian
kids, anyway. The reality is that no supporter of public education has
ever wanted or asked for relief from the cost of providing a first rate
education for our young. Frankly, we can’t think of a better way to
spend money. As well, we know that when the last middle class family
finally leaves the system, Australia will have become the first
democracy to settle for a public education system that provides - in the
words of Prime Minister John Howard - a “reasonable safety net” for the
poor.

So where do we go from here? First we need to be frank - with ourselves
and with others - about why the subject of school funding gets us so hot
under the collar. Perhaps just knowing that much of the passion,
invective and downright nastiness around this debate is driven by our
very human and understandable anxiety about what kind of parents we are
will help us all to calm down. Maybe then we’ll be in a position to have
a reasoned and effective discussion about what - when it comes to
education- is really best for all Australian children. Even those
without perfect parents.

Jane Caro is the co-author (with Chris Bonnor) of The Stupid Country;
How Australia is Dismantling Public Education (UNSW Press, 2007).