---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2007-05-30
tags: ~
title: There is racism, and then there is the glory of multiculturalism
---
The government is in trouble in the polls and the Prime Minister claims
there’s no rabbits in the hat. Maybe, but I’m skeptical. Both history
and early policy signs - the reduction of benefits available to new
migrants, the Federal government’s consideration of a ban on HIV
positive migrants - suggests that as polling day draws closer, there
will be rabbits. The same ones that have been stewed before.

The multicultural “wedge” is all about the so-called Howard Battlers,
the economically liberal, socially conservative swing voters shamelessly
courted by both major parties. Its existence reminds us how easy it is
to divide Australians over multiculturalism, though the real question is
why.

It would be silly to deny that fear of difference amongst segments of
the population, and its kissing cousin racism, play a role. But a
perception of unaddressed weaknesses in the multicultural credo may also
be to blame.

At the heart of multiculturalism is an assertion about the positive
nature of difference and the benefits that homogenous societies gain by
accepting different religions, ethnic, racial, cultural, and linguistic
groups, and assisting them to maintain and share their knowledge,
perspectives and cultures. Behind such claims is the unarticulated
presumption that the only apects of culture that migrants seek to
preserve, and to share with the wider community, are those Ayaan Hirsi
Ali recently described as [sentimental]() language, music, culinary
traditions and cultural and religious rituals.

Australians opposed to the intake of non-Anglo migrants and the respect
afforded to such sentimental differences by cultural institutions like
schools and governments - the yearly outcry against cr&egrave;ches that
celebrate multiple religious festivals in December rather than just
Christmas is the classic - appear to be motivated by nothing more lofty
than racism, prejudice based on stereotype, ignorance, fear and
xenophobia. This makes the short shrift supporters of multiculturalism
have given their concerns understandable and justified.

But events here and overseas have shown that some religious and cultural
minorities in western countries like Australia - recent migrants and
denizens of longer lineage - have sought to maintain more than the
sentimental aspects of their culture. Most confronting has been the
home-grown terrorists motivated by fanatical misogynist theocratic
values brought from other lands. The London bombers, the 17 men arrested
for conspiring to storm the Canadian parliament and bomb power plants in
Ontario, the group of Sydney and Melbourne men charged with
terrorism-related offences and Mohammed Bouyeri, the second generation
Dutch man who murdered progressive filmmaker Theo van Gogh all appeared
to be motivated by a parallel set of values fundamentally at odds with
those central to western democratic societies. Values they felt strongly
enough about to kill.

Ali, the Somali-born critic of Islam who was Bouyeri’s next intended
target, argues that western citizens cannot afford to tolerate
sub-groups in the community with militant values that reject democracy
and the rule of law, and privilege group entitlements and solidarity
over individual rights. Tolerance of the intolerable, she suggests,
leads to the grievous oppression of women and puts them, and the
community as a whole, at risk of violence.

Her comments, made recently at the Commonwealth Club in California, were
about migrant communities, but they seem no less true when applied to
cultural and religious sub-groups with Anglo roots or long lineages in
Australia. If migrant groups are rightly prohibited from mutilating the
genitals of their girls in the name of culture and religion, why should
the refusal of non- migrant religious groups to hire women for
leadership positions because they are women or as teachers in their
schools because they are unmarried - both clear violations of state and
federal anti-discrimination law - be allowed to stand? If we rail
against the misogynist violence-condoning theology preached by migrant
religious leaders like Sheik Taj Din al-Hilali, why should we turn a
blind a eye to the misogynist cant streaming from some fundamentalist
Christian and Jewish pulpits?

The preservation by religious, ethnic and cultural minorities of their
unique language, music, food, cultural and religious rituals - and the
sharing of these differences with the wider community - has enriched,
enlivened and enlarged Australian society. It is the positive fruits of
Australian multiculturalism of which we may feel justifiably proud.

But when minority groups preserve and seek to disseminate a parallel set
of deep values that preach - and lead to the practice of - oppression or
violence against Australians within the group and outside of it, we have
a problem. It doesn’t matter if those preaching oppression and violence
have an Anglo, or a long, lineage in Australia, of if they just arrived.
What matters is the threat they pose to our security and the capacity of
every one of us, regardless of their gender or age, to exercise rights
and freedoms guaranteed by law.

So where does this leave the rabbits, and those who wish to defend them,
as electoral hunting season nears?

Not, I believe, without ammunition or a warren to defend. Racism is
unacceptable and the preservation and celebration of sentimental
differences between peoples in democratic pluralist societies has and
will continue to be a key source of their vibrancy and success. These
truths are the foundation stones of multiculturalism.

The multicultural project is a sound one. We just need to know where to
draw the line.