---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2007-01-07
tags: ~
title: 'Do we want to help overweight kids, or insult them? '
---
Fat camps, prohibitions on junk food advertising, bans on sugary drinks
in school canteens, Medicare subsidies for private weight loss programs,
chair-free classrooms, food pyramids. Bariatric surgery, school
weigh-ins, public service announcements telling kids to take more
exercise, public hospital weight management clinics for the young.
Bulging childhood waistlines as risk factors for diabetes, heart
disease, escalating health care costs and social exclusion. Childhood
obesity as lifestyle choice, disease, biological destiny or the result
of parental ignorance, sloth or permissiveness. And in 2006, a
three-fold increase in the number of Melbourne children - some as young
as 10 - admitted to hospital with eating disorders resulting from their
morbid fear of fat.

And of winding up unloveable and unloved?

Surely, I am not the only person who has noticed that not only has our
current approach to the “youth obesity epidemic” been ineffective in
reducing our children’s collective girth, but also violates the
first-order principle of medical ethics that above all, we must do no
harm.

How does calling our kids tubby harm them? These days everyone knows
that “fat” is more than a physical description of body mass, but a
negative assessment of physical attractiveness and moral worth. Despite
protests outside the White House by overweight Americans holding
placards insisting that “fat is not a four letter word”, children today
are well aware of the connection in the popular mind between the
generously waisted and the indiscreet, the lazy, the pitiful, the
asexual and the wildly out of control. Cultural researchers say it is no
coincidence that in times of sexual permissiveness and consumerist
plenty, thinness is idealized for representing virtue, self-denial and
self-control.

Children’s bodies change rapidly right up to their early twenties, with
the pre-teen and teen years critical moments for the development of
self-identity and self-esteem. It’s hard to imagine a worse time for
children to be told their developing bodies are an eyesore and evidence
of poor moral character.

Just as damning is the inevitable failure of any behavioural change
approach obsessed with cataloguing and stamping out fat. Behavioural
change relies on our feeling good about ourselves, something just as
true for children as for adults. The higher the temperature surrounding
the moral panic about our children’s expanding girth, the worse
overweight children are likely to feel about themselves, and the less
likely they are to feel worthy of their own efforts to change.

This counterproductive behavioural circularity that begins with low
self-esteem is familiar to addiction counsellors, and is no less evident
- should we care to listen - in the testimony of the overweight. “You
get in a vicious circle about losing weight,” Diane O’Mara told the Age
earlier this year. “You eat the wrong thing, then you feel bad, then you
eat more.” The nexus between harsh social judgments of the obese, their
low self-esteem and consequent inability to lose weight is summed up by
American professor and author Peter Stearns. “If you fail to lose weight
you are demonstrating you’re a bad person. It’s a big burden. Faced with
this additional pressure you are even more likely to say \`The hell with
it! I’m going to get ice cream. I am such a bad person I need to solace
myself.’”

Of course, the poor correlation between negative self esteem and
successful weight loss serves the diet industry well. Studies suggest
that only when consumers hate their overweight bodies, and believe them
unattractive, are they motivated to dig deep for the diet products and
services worth more than 500 million a year in Australia. As well, the
now accepted paradox that dieting makes you fat ensures that the vast
majority of consumers will “fail” and - dragging their bedraggled
self-esteem behind them - return for second and third helpings of
expensive but ineffective “therapy”.

But if insults are counter-productive and hand wringing is out, what
should we be doing? In general terms, we need to stop talking about the
depravity of fat, and focus instead on the desirability of good health.
Focusing on obesity inevitably leads to “don’t” and “shouldn’t” messages
that problematically posit guilt and counterproductively idealise
penitent self-denial. In contrast, promoting good health lends itself to
messages of “do” (eat healthy foods) and “desert” (as in, you deserve
it) that connect self-nurture with the bodily well-being necessary to
enjoy the good things in life.

Positive messages are also more likely to be effective in promoting
behavioural change, and insofar as they focus more on the importance of
staying active rather than on what we eat, may even be more consistent
with the medical evidence. Paul Campos, Professor of law at the
University of Colorado and author of The Obesity Myth argues that
activity is a better predictor of health than weight and that “There is
no good evidence that significant long-term weight loss is beneficial to
health”.

We need to speak to our children, and about them, in ways that make our
love for them, and approval of the people they are becoming, crystal
clear. Teaching them how to nurture themselves by eating healthy food
and participating in physical activity they enjoy is the most ethical
and effective way for us as parents, and as a society, to offer them the
gift of good health.