---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2007-10-01
tag: writings
title: "Laws on Sex Work Must be Framed to Protect Womenâ\x80\x99s Choice"
---
Sex work is back in the news. Having hardly been broached in polite
conversation since the state government’s “tolerance zone” policy for
street sex work went down in flames five years ago, the West Australian
government’s decision to descriminalise and regulate indoor prostitution
has refocused minds around the country on the best way to manage the
world’s oldest profession.

As a feminist academic and long-time St Kilda resident, I’ve been
thinking about these issues for a long time. Only recently, however,
have I arrived at what I think is a fair and sensible approach to the
issue, one that recognises women as moral agents capable of accepting
both the rights and responsibilities associated with selling sex.

It looks like this.

Advocates and opponents of decriminalisation adopt extreme
characterisations of women to justify their positions. On one side are
the decriminalisation advocates - self-proclaimed unions or advocacy
groups for prostitutes - who contend that sex work is a job like any
other, that women have a right to perform this “work” whenever and
wherever they like, and that society is obliged to regulate to protect
sell-sellers from the inherent risks associated with having serial sex
with unknown men.

In the opposing corner are the radical feminists and members of the
religious right. For this unholy alliance, prostitution is always a
violent and exploitative encounter that, by definition, no competent
woman would ever choose to participate in. As two Norwegian scientists
put it, “no-one wants to rent out her vagina as a garbage can for hordes
of anonymous men’s ejaculations”. Dismissing with an imperious hand-wave
the claims of some prostitutes that they freely choose to sell their
bodies, real and pseudo radical feminists and religious wowsers persist
in describing all sex-sellers as victims whom they must protect by
promulgating and enforcing no- tolerance policies.

The victim-approach to managing street prostitution is objectionable on
a number of grounds. These include its obnoxious paternalism, and the
disingenuous way in which political agitation designed to impose the
agitator’s view of what is best on everyone else is dressed up as
selfless “feminist” advocacy on behalf of women. But most offensive is
the way in which the argument itself victimises sex-sellers by denying
their experience and stripping them of their agency. Such
objectification allows the no-tolerance posse to dismiss everything
sex-sellers say about their experience - when they don’t say things that
support the no-tolerance position - as false consciousness or further
evidence of victimhood. For instance, Gunilla Ekberg, the co-executive
director of the International Coalition Against Trafficking in Women,
explains the support some prostitutes give to decriminalization as
evidence of their desire to “defend their own dignity” in a violent
context that “they can’t change”.

Abandoning the all or nothing approach, and recognizing the indisputable
fact that some women do choose to sell sex, while others don’t,
incarnates a realistic and fair approach for the management of indoor
and outdoor sex in liberal democracies. A position where sex sellers are
moral agents worthy of respect - instead of pitiable victims in need of
paternalistic protection - that have both rights and responsibilities
with regard to how they ply their trade. Insofar as the consequences of
their choice to sell sex remains with them, competent adult women (and
men) should be free to sell their bodies, however strongly some in the
community object. However, like other choosers, when the consequences of
the selling choice restricts the capacity of fellow citizens to exercise
their freedoms, the state is obligated to restrict their activity.

A focus on autonomous choice also justifies state intervention where sex
workers lack the capacity - because they are too young, mentally ill,
sexually or physically abused or drug addicted - to make choices about
selling sex that are worthy of the name.

What this cashes out to are policies that decriminalize and
constructively regulate indoor prostitution, and prohibit street
solicitation and sex. Behind this approach is a rebuttable presumption
that adult women who sell sex are autonomous, and that communities
affected by street sex suffer an unjustified loss of amenity and
security. Such policies address the very real potential for exploitation
and coercion in the sex trade by offering sex-sellers real opportunities
to exit like income support, places in drug rehabilitation programs and
police intervention in violent relationships at regular intervals at
their “workplaces” and each time they have contact with the law. The
availability of such programs to women working indoors should give us
confidence that sellers are choosing this way of life, while offering
street prostitutes - when combined with fines and jail terms for punters
- a real opportunity to either move inside or to exit the trade.

Women who are truly moral agents must accept both the rights and
responsibilities that accompany their choices. I think it vital that
public language and policy concerning women - particularly as sexual and
reproductive beings - validate us as citizens capable of both making
choices, and living with their consequences. Autonomous adult women have
a right to sell sex providing they go about it in ways that don’t
unfairly burden the community of which they are a part, though as a
community we have a positive obligation to ensure that at every stage of
what is potentially a violent, exploitative and coercive game a woman’s
freedom to say “no” is protected.

This is why allowing brothels to operate in a regulated fashion is a
good idea, but street sex work can never be tolerated. Not just because
a disproportionate number of street prostitutes are too young, too
drug-addicted, too psychologically scarred or cowed by violence or abuse
to make an autonomous choice to sell themselves, but because the cost to
the community of their behaviour, even if theirs is a choice worthy of
the name, is far too high.