---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2007-07-20
title: High price to be paid if abortion reform bid fails
---
I love Right to Life President Margaret Tighe. After years of dealing
with anti-choice activists who pretend their feminists, researchers, and
medical ethicists - anything but foot soldiers for God - her
straight-talking misogyny is like a breath of fresh air. With Margaret,
women who seek abortions know just where they stand.

Take her response to Tuesday’s announcement by Labor MP Candy Broad that
she will introduce a Private Member’s Bill to decriminalise abortion.
“If this legislation is passed, wild ducks in Victoria will have more
protection than unborn children.”

Actually, wild ducks have no legal protection in Victoria, but such
comments provide a pithy summary of how Tighe and the tiny minority of
Australians who agree with her rate women’s capacities as ethical
decision makers (if you missed it, we’re the sporting shooters from
which our fetuses need legal protection). From such disdainful views of
women’s moral agency flow anti-choice enthusiasms for the perpetuation
and enforcement of criminal laws they know don’t stop women having
abortions, but maximize the shame and pain they experience in doing so.

Some Victorians believe that the current confused system - where the
criminal law prescribes jail for women and doctors who “procure
miscarriages”, but the common law forgives their felonious behaviour in
cases where the abortion is deemed proportional and necessary to prevent
serious danger to the women’s life or health - is working just fine.

But they’re wrong. The retention of statutes only rarely enforced makes
the law an ass. It also allows anti-choice crusaders wedged at various
points in the legal system to prosecute whenever they choose. This is
what happened in 1986 to Queensland Drs Peter Bayliss and Dawn Cullen,
in 1998 to West Australian Drs Victor Chan and Hoh Peng Lee and to the
former head of the ultrasound unit at the Royal Women’s Hospital in
Melbourne who was pursued for 6 and one half years by anti-choice
Liberal politician Julian McGuaran before finally being cleared last
year. And when one doctor is prosecuted the rest get nervous, reducing
the services they provide and so undercutting women’s access to timely,
professional care.

But love it or hate it, the introduction of Ms Broad’s bill has made
history of the current legal framework for abortion. Access and equity
for women can only go forwards - or backwards - from here. This is
because it was one thing for successive parliaments to refuse to debate
decriminalization, but would be quite another for the 2007 Victorian
Parliament to affirm of the criminality of aborting women and their
doctors. Should Ms Broad’s attempt to repeal abortion from the criminal
code fail, in other words, the costs to women and couples of
reproductive age could be devastating. Not only will the stigma attached
to abortion increase, but access will likely decline as medicos retreat
to their bunkers to await signs of what the renewed legal landscape
holds for them and their patients.

Unplanned pregnancy is a fact of life. The World Health Organisation
estimates that even if couples contracepted perfectly every time, there
would be nearly six million accidental pregnancies every year. At the
heart of the debate on repeal is the question of who should decide. When
Health Minister Bronwyn Pike insists abortion can’t be pulled out of the
Crimes Act without something else being put it (rendering the entire
descriminalisation project moot in one fell swoop) she stands as one
with Margaret Tighe in assessing politicians, doctors - anyone but the
pregnant woman herself - as best qualified to know when an abortion is
justified. The Premier and Treasurer Brumby’s support for transferring
existing common law restrictions to the Health Act is more of the same.
As well, they show the government, even at this early stage of the
debate, as running scared.

Personally, I wouldn’t mind seeing the Premier, Brumby and the
supposedly pro-choice Health Minister stand up for women for a change. I
mean, what else could they possibly be saying by insisting on the need
for legal “safeguards” to prevent “unfettered access” than that the law
is the only thing that stops women getting pregnant will-nilly for the
sheer pleasure of being able to abort? Not only are such claims
insulting and completely clueless about the way women approach the
crisis of unplanned pregnancy, they bear no basis in fact. The ACT
repealed abortion from the criminal code in 2002 and has reported no
change in procedure rates, while countries where abortion is legal and
accessible, like Belgium and the Netherlands, enjoyi some of the lowest
rates in the world.

Like it or not, the position politicians and the public take on repeal
reflects their view of women as moral decision-makers. Those in favour
trust women’s judgment on questions concerning their own bodies and
lives, while those against don’t.

Whatever your view, the time to express it - to Bracks, Brumby, Pike and
most importantly your own MP - is now. Rest assured Miargaret Tighe’s
crew will.