---
assets: ~
published: 2007-09-28
tags: ~
title: Prevention is One Thing, But Take Care with the Cure
---
Ingrates. That’s the word that keeps coming to mind when the Canberra
lesbian case is raised. That, and some vital misapprehension of what
parenting - at its core, and in its specifics - is all about.

Sadly, the fact that the parents involved happen to be lesbians has
impeded our capacity to get at the heart of what bothers us about this
case. And trust me, this is irrelevant. In the recent Australian past,
other parents - a single straight woman from New South Wales, an older
heterosexual couple from Queensland - have sought compensation in the
courts for medical negligence that resulted in a child being born where
none was wanted.

Courts have traditionally frowned on compensating couples for children
“wrongly born” because doctors failed to diagnose a pregnancy when
abortion was still an option, or incompetently performed a
sterilisation, or any other act of medical negligence resulting in the
birth of a healthy child where all reasonable attempts had been made to
avoid just this outcome. The reason was that they believed, and felt all
of us out here in TV land should believe too, that the birth of a
healthy child is always a “gift from God” or a “blessing.”

But this is rubbish. Every time we use contraception or, when
contraception fails, seek abortion we frankly acknowledge that we don’t
wish to be “blessed” that way.

And the truth is that if - as was the case for so long - gross medical
negligence resulting in the birth of a healthy child is consequence-free
for dodgy doctors, it’s hard to see how they’ll not be more dodgy
doctors in the future. Not to mention the legitimate need some suing
parents have for compensation monies to feed, cloth and educate a child
they’d not planned to have, and are missing out on educational and
employment opportunities to raise.

Yet such cases do leave a bad taste in the mouth. One reason is the
image most people can’t help but get of the child involved - in some
cases old enough to read the papers or listen to the news - discovering
that they had not been wanted, and the precise details of what their
birth had cost their parents in emotional, physical and monetary terms.
The fact that such children also have to cope with the fact that others
know they weren’t wanted adds to the sense that parents who bring such
suits - through their betrayal of their child’s trust and failure to
protect their child from hurt - fundamentally misunderstand what
parenthood is about.

Which is, in my view, unconditional love. A number of years ago a
childless-by-choice colleague expressed amazement at people’s
willingness to make commitments to live with, love and nurture for
several decades a person they don’t even know. To volunteer, in other
words, for the duties of parenthood.

He is right. Parental volunteerism is amazing, and points to what - when
it is done well - is so morally admirable about those who raise children
well. From the first sighting of those double lines through the plastic
test window until the car with the tin cans and streamers drives away,
the experience of parenthood confounds expectations, preferences and
even heartfelt desires. You wanted a natural birth but ended up with a
C-section, hoped for a girl but got a boy, intended to breastfeed but
ended up bottle-feeding, wished for an athletic kid to take to the rugby
but wound up with a bookish one who preferred Scouts.

That your children sometimes disappoint, that the experience of
parenting was not what you expected is par for the course and clearly
spelled in the small print in the implied parental contract that
accompanies each bundle of joy. The challenge is not just to accept the
unpredictability of the experience, but to revel in it. To demonstrate
the virtues of good parenthood not just by having the grace to accept
the unexpected, but to make the best of it by showing a love devoid or
strings or reservations for your child each and everyday, whoever that
child turns out to be.

Difficult? You betcha, but then nothing that brings joy, engenders
self-respect and earns the admiration of others is easy. And done
properly, parenthood is one of the mot rewarding and respect-worthy
undertakings in the world.

Perhaps where the Canberra couples, and other parents who sue for
children “wrongfully born” fail is not knowing where to draw the line.
Yes, parenthood today is not what it was yesterday and most of us feel
it is justified, even morally required, to exercise control where we can
by contracepting, screening prenatally, choosing abortion. . To avoid or
refuse the hefty responsibilities of parenthood when we feel we can’t
manage them and be the kind of parent we wish to be.

But at some point in the proceedings a line is crossed. The line beyond
which control - responsible or otherwise - can no longer be exercised.
Where the only moral option is to quit kicking and accept the outcome -
the living, breathing, feeling, vulnerable outcome - with good grace and
hand in hand, to step into the dark in search of light.

To say a child has been born. Let us rejoice.