---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2007-04-10
title: Safe Sex Means Just That
---
It is important we don’t miss the forest for the trees. As the Michael
Neal scandal rolls on, with the Health Minister Bronwyn Pike now
admitting that the health department “bungled” the case, we need to
consider whether the “better protocols” being mooted as the answer for
protecting public health in the future are really the answer. Or does
officialdom need to dig deeper to discover why transmission rates of HIV
in Victoria are high and rising.

I think we need to dig deeper. Down, in fact, to the central moral
claims of the safe sex message at the heart of public health campaigns
to reduce transmission of HIV/AIDS.

Debates about the moral adequacy of the safe sex message have been going
on in the HIV Positive community for years. On one side are those who
support public health messages focused solely on the responsibility
individuals have to protect themselves from infection. From campaigns
that cajole men to not be a fool and “cover their tool”, to the “cover
yourself against AIDS” and “love is not enough” messages, the existing
educational focus emphasizes the need for people who wish to avoid
infection to watch their own backs. Commented the CEO of the Victorian
AIDS Council on the Neal case: “Without wishing to sound like the last
of the rugged individualists, people do need to take the responsibility
to protect themselves”.

Of course the flip side of the “it’s all down to you” approach is that
when unsafe consensual sex does result in transmission, it is the newly
infected partner who wears the blame. This is particularly the case. it
appears, if the reason the HIV-negative person had unprotected sex
because they trusted that a positive partner would either disclose his
status or simply refuse to proceed without a condom. “We’re trying to
work on educating people not to make those mistakes and assumptions that
stuff up their lives”, the convener of the National Association of
People Living with HIV/AIDS said recently.

On the other side of the debate are those like the former convener of
Positive Women Philomena Horsley who reject the blame-the-victim feel of
this hyper-individualist approach to public health. They contend that
while there may be good reason to design public health messages to
trigger the natural inclination of most to look out for number one, the
moral inadequacy of this approach - and it’s lack of cohesion with the
moral expectations of many - demands an urgent revamp. They note that
not only do some gay men assume their sexual partner will do the right
thing by them, this propensity to trust others not to do the dirty on
them is not just a normal and good thing, it is largely justified.
According to a recent report by the Australian Research Centre for Sex,
Health and Society, the vast majority of HIV positive men in Australia
do disclose their status to sexual partners at the beginning of a
relationship or the moment they discover it themselves, while the
majority wear condoms in casual encounters with partners whose HIV
status they either do not know or know to be negative.

In other words, despite consistent communications to the sexually active
of all varieties that the only obligations we have are to ourselves,
those infected by the virus - and at risk of infection - expect more
than this, both from ourselves and from others. We expect that as human
beings we have obligations not to harm our fellows, and that having HIV
or being at risk of it doesn’t ameliorate this responsibility one jot.

Nor should it. It is not “ruggedly individualistic” but rather morally
offensive for public health messages to imply that we have no
responsibilities to other human beings, and that we are chumps when we
expect others to recognize and honor their obligations to us. Not just
offensive, but out of touch with the everyday sexual morality practiced
by many, and dismissive of the needs and circumstances of particular
at-risk communities.

Most notable of these is the small but sadly growing community of
positive women. Women commonly contract HIV from their spouses or steady
boyfriends, men who these women trust are not just faithful but
straight. Public health messages that imply that these women had no one
to blame but themselves for infection because they didn’t insist that
“if it wasn’t on, it wasn’t on” overlook the culpability these men bear
for failing to disclose their risk factors or to insist that a condom be
worn every time.

What is the answer? I’d like to see a “Safe Sex Plus” approach to
reducing infection rates. Men and women should continue to be told that
the best way of protecting themselves from infection is to ensure
condoms are part of each sexual encounter, but they must also be
reminded of their obligation to do the right thing by others.

If individuals know they are or might be positive, they have an
obligation to protect their sexual partner by either disclosing what
they know - or don’t know - about their HIV status, or simply insisting
on a condom every time. And if infection does occur, it is not those who
trusted in others not to harm them who deserve blame, but those who
didn’t do all that they could to avoid doing the harming.