---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2007-01-15
tag: writings
title: Privacy Should be Our Choice
---
Privacy, as Victorian Privacy Commissioner Paul Chadwick recently
observed, is a freedom most noticed in its absence. Sadly, we only seem
to appreciate what we had once it’s gone.

Philosophers, having long accepted the inadequacy of words to explain
the importance of privacy, often illustrate it with 18th century thinker
Jeremy Bentham’s panopticon.

The panopticon is a circular building divided into cells constructed
around a central tower. While occupants are isolated from one another by
walls, they can be viewed by an unseen observer.

A prison? Absolutely, but more than this the building was designed to
obtain “power of mind over mind by creating a”sentiment of an invisible
omniscience", or what you and I might describe as the unnerving
uncertainty that someone could be watching you.

The value of privacy is only grasped when we recognize that even if the
surveyors do nothing with the information they gather about cell
occupants - neither recording nor relaying it - it is their power to
observe us if and when they choose that causes harm.

The Federal Government announced last April its intention to pursue what
is in all but name a national identity card. The scheme has the capacity
to compromise our privacy in relationship to government, and the
mega-corporations (among them Unisys, Visa and IBM) expected to vie for
the lucrative privilege of providing the technology to merge, match and
share our personal information across the public and private sectors.

Current proposals suggest my card will contain my unique identifying
number and name on the front, as well as my signature and biometric
photo. The smart chip will contain - among other things - my address, my
date of birth and details of my children and other dependants. These
details are mandatory, must reside in the “public” zone of the card, and
are protected by a PIN so insecure that the Australian Privacy
Foundation has condemned the card’s technological design as “completely
inadequate”. In other words, according to the parts of the legislation
the government has made public, anyone with a card reader will be able
to see the private details stored on my card’s chip.

This includes hundreds of thousands of government employees, health and
allied professions and childcare workers. Last year Centrelink revealed
it had to sack, sanction or turn over to the police or government
prosecutors 2% of their staff for breaches of “customer” privacy.

Some people object to identity cards on principle. They, like Liberal
party official Tim Warner, believe that by forcing us to prove our
identity to obtain government services, ID cards invert the master
servant relationship of citizen and government. Governments only confirm
such fears when they contend that those with nothing to hide have
nothing to fear.

I agree with such principles, but my objection to the card is more
practical.

I advocate for reproductive rights. Each year I spend time and money
protecting my phone number (it’s silent), my address (not on the
electoral rolls), and the names, ages and other identifying details of
my children. I do this because a handful of my opponents are violent, as
the murder of a security guard at the East Melbourne Fertility Clinic in
2001 proved. As far as possible, I try to protect my family from the
negative repercussions of my activism.

Minister for Human Services Joe Hockey says that when it comes to the
card, Australians have choice. We don’t have to have the card at all. As
well, he says that the card mandates the same information found on a
driver’s license. If the system is cracked - something he has repeatedly
refused to guarantee won’t happen - citizens lose no more than they do
when their wallets go missing.

First, it is disingenuous to say that participation in the new identity
card system is voluntary. No card means no Medicare rebates, PBS
medicines, Centrelink payments, Veteran’s pensions, disability benefits,
carers’ payments, baby bonus, AusStudy, unemployment benefits or related
concessions on public transport and utility bills. Unless we are
independently wealthy, we will need to sign up.

The wallet story also mischaracterizes reality. I lose mine with
absent-minded-professorial regularity and usually, someone nice returns
it to me intact.

When they don’t, or its been deliberately nabbed, the loss of my silent
number or information about my children has never been a concern. This
is not only because, like most people, I don’t keep this information in
my wallet, but because even if I did, it would be unlikely to be of
interest to an opportunistic thief: something that can’t be said about
the high-tech robbers expected to attempt to break in to the honeypot of
identity card data.

Like much that is lost, neither the privacy of my silent number or
address can be found again. Like a victim of domestic violence, at
similar risk to having their safety jeopardized by exposure of their
address details, getting a new number and shifting house are the only
way to regain my security. At least it’s something. The privacy of my
children’s details is gone forever.

All of us are at risk of such irrecoverable loss of our private
identifying details and - because the database will hold our biometric
data and copies of our proof of identity documents like passports and
birth certificates - identity theft. No matter how state of the art the
security designed to protect it, the very nature of the IT wars - the
battle for supremacy between security geeks and crackers - means
security risks to the system will be perpetual and very real. Steal my
credit card, I cancel it and get another. But what next when a
cyber-crim knocks off the biometric parameters of my face?

Current proposals for an Australian identity card put my security and
that of my family at risk. However, one should not need to demonstrate
such a threat to claim the right to enjoy the benefits of privacy. The
balance is all wrong. The question isn’t whether citizens have something
to hide. The question is whether the government is entitled to demand,
record, sift, sort, match and share our private information and
biometric identifiers without making a solid case for why this is
necessary, how it will work, and why less invasive approaches won’t do.

The kick-off date for card issuing is April or May 2008. Time is fast
running out for Australians to say “no”.