---
assets: ~
published: 2007-08-08
tags: ~
title: Support and Respect Gives IVF Parents Time to Tell
---
It’s Time to Tell. The slogan is back, along with the second phase of
the Infertility Treatment Authority’s campaign to inform parents of how
Victoria’s infertility laws may affect their lives, and parenting
choices.

We’ve learned a lot since the Telling Campaign got under way last year.
Then, the panic was about the legal rights of Victorian donors to
identifying information about any child born from their sperm or less
eggs. The problem was - and remains - that the majority of
donor-conceived kids don’t know the truth about their conception. One
Victorian study found only 37% of parents had told their kids, while
international figures suggest that somewhere between 43% and 82% of
parents never intend to tell. As the first batch of kids affected by the
legislation turned 18, donors choosing to pursue their rights under the
law could have been the first to break the news to offspring that they
were donor-conceived.

As it turns out, much of that panic may have been misplaced. The truth
is that very little was - and still is - known about the motivations of
sperm donors. When modern infertility treatment methods were in their
infancy, donors tended to be young men motivated by money, and
appreciative of the anonymity that has long surrounded donation. But as
donor-conceived children began asserting a “right to know,” donor
recruitment strategies began to change and with them, the motivational
profiles of donors.

A recent analysis of such changes suggests that when it comes to sperm
donors, you get what you pay for. If infertility treatment services
offer men a fee for service (something not allowed in Australia) and
guarantee them anonymity, they wind up with a pool of donors primarily
motivated by money and anxious to preserve their anonymity. If services
don’t pay and require all donors to consent to being identified, they
tend to recruit older “family men” with altruistic motivations and a
commitment to disclosure and openness.

So far, altruistic, respectful and compassionate appear to be good
descriptors of the pool of donors affected by Victoria’s 1984
Infertility (Medical Procedures) Act. Descriptions that should perhaps
not be all that surprising given that since the middle of 1988, men
donating sperm in this state have known not just about their legal
rights to seek identifying information about resulting children, but
their obligations to disclose identifying information about themselves,
too.

The Infertility Treatment Authority has been evaluating the
effectiveness of the Time to Tell Campaign in informing parents of
donor-conceived children about what the legislation means for them.
Their data, made public for the first time today, suggests that the
approximately 58 donors who gained a right to seek identifying
information about just over 100 young adult in 2006 - a request that
might have disclosed to the donor-conceived adult time that they were
donor-conceived - were pretty swell guys.

Yes, these men had the right to apply for the identifying information
that Victoria’s laws - unique in this respect - granted them. And they
could have pursued this entitlement with little concern about the
potential impact their voyage to knowledge might have had on the family
their donation helped create.

But they didn’t. Instead, the twenty-seven donors that contacted the ITA
in search of information and support, many went away satisfied with an
application for non-identifying information about their offspring, or
the contribution of their details to the Authority’s voluntary register
for ready access by offspring or parents seeking information.

The few who did chose to exercise their lawful entitlement to
identifying information had offspring that had not yet reached the age
of 18, meaning the child’s parents retained the right to give - or
refuse - consent for its release. To date, according to the Victorian
Law Reform Commission, the majority of donors have respected “…the
privacy of the recipient families and have no intention of applying for
information about the person conceived with their gametes. Instead, they
are willing to make themselves available should the child or young adult
wish to make contact in the future.” In summary, says the ITA’s CEO
Louise Johnson, “Donors have been very sensitive to the needs of
families formed from their donation.”

It is early days yet. Two hundred more Victorians conceived by donation
pass through the portal to adulthood this year, and accompanying them
will be another lot of donors with unknown ideas about identity, family,
genes and privacy, to name just a few. Such unknowns should hasten the
state government’s implementation of the Victorian Law Reform
Commission’s recent recommendation that the right of donors to apply for
identifying information be repealed. It should also ensure support for
the Infertility Treatment Authority’s decision to accede to the requests
of parents to place a note on the register informing information-seekers
that the child is not aware she is donor-conceived.

None of this is to say parents shouldn’t tell. They should, and as early
in a child’s life as possible, in accordance with a growing body of
research suggesting that children told before age ten find it easy to
integrate their non-conventional conception story into their evolving
identity. But coercion must be taken out of the mix and replaced with
facilitative interventions like the Time to Tell Campaign - supportive,
respectful, information-rich - that enable parents to find their own
time to tell.