---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2007-01-01
title: Do Blogs Spell the End of Moderated Opinion?
---
Do blogs spell the end of moderated opinion? As expected, internet
enthusiasts say “yes”. The destiny of the World Wide Web is to end
hierarchical, corporate control over the content and dissemination of
knowledge, and the glorious reality - as far as editorial and analysis
is concerned - is nothing less than the liberation of the opinionated
from the oppressive control of toady, petty and uncomprehending editors.

Some Australian editors, not to mention relatively savvy members of the
intelligentsia, appear to have bought the “end is nigh” story, much as
they did the reports - greatly exaggerated it turned out - of the death
of print news from the internet (and before that television) and the
death of radio from podcasting.

The reality is that the net is the medium, not the message. Yes, the
World Wide Web enables opinion and analysis to be distributed to
consumers in different ways. However, insofar as there really is an
audience wanting to consume informed opinion and analysis, there is no
logical reason to suppose changes in the way such content can be
disseminated should impact in absolute terms - either negatively or
positively - on demand for the content.

Can personal blogs (web diaries or logs) posted free-of-charge on the
web meet this demand? Are they doing so already, increasingly
cannibalising audiences which currently consume - and pay for either by
subscription or by viewing ads - editor-moderated opinion and analysis
on radio, TV, newspapers and news magazines distributed both in hard
copy and on line (enabling links and interactive reader comments)?

With one important caveat, my judgement on both questions is “no”. When
they do their job well, editors provide a valuable service to time-poor
readers struggling to remain informed citizens in an information-dense
world. Valuable enough, that they will continue to seek it out and,
where necessary, pay for it. That service is the sorting and selecting
of opinion and analysis on the basis of priority (the top stories of the
day), “mix” (diversity of subject) and quality (the best-written stories
by the people most likely to know something about the issue). It also
includes packaging the product so it is visually appealing and - because
paragraphs are plentiful, words are spelled properly and sentences are
grammatical - easy to read.

Personal blogs can be well written and provide considered and informed
opinion by those with the experience and knowledge to offer consumers
considerable insight into the subject to hand. However, once we get past
the giddiness of the gateless access available to both writers and
readers, we may be able to be honest enough to admit that some are
semi-literate rants by myopic, racist, sexist and and/or homophobic
cretins with tickets on themselves and barrows to push. At least these
are easy to spot. The blogs I worry about are those lacking the “danger
Will Robinson” alert signs: written in spare and polished prose, posted
on expensive well-designed sites yet evidencing what can only be
described as a tenuous grasp of logic and a hostile relationship with
the facts.

Of course, individuals with time to burn can do their own vetting of
blogs on topics where they have enough expertise to know when someone
else is out of their depth (My education and experience allows me to
spot a pseudo-feminist or a quack ethicist at 20 paces). However, like
most others, I am defenceless in the face of well-written views on
topics about which I am curious but largely uninformed. Editorial
oversight is one of the processes that prevents the publication of
well-packaged pseudo-knowledge - much of the time, anyway.

Which, amidst the now deafening howls of protest, takes me to the
caveat. Yes, vetting by editors is one process for guaranteeing us that
some degree of veracity attaches to the content we are spending our
hard-earned time consuming, but it is not the only one. For proof of
this, we need look no further than the collective and demonstrably
reliable editing process used to moderate contributions to online
encyclopaedia. My claim is about the ongoing value in today’s world, and
worlds to come, of moderated opinion and analysis, even in a
cyber-universe where personal blogs are ubiquitous and priced to sell.
Currently, traditional editorial practices are one of the only ways
we’ve got to achieve reasonable levels of accuracy, veracity, and good
clean copy. In the future, equally reliable ways may, and indeed are
predicted, to emerge. Those that will be preferred by future consumers
of analysis and opinion is anyone’s guess.

But here is mine.

What contemporary blogophiles advance as the benefit of their preferred
medium is the weakness of opinion moderated by a handful of mostly pale,
male and stale editors. Blogs empower those marginalised or excluded by
traditional editorial gate-keeping processes. These include the young,
the female, the queer, the non-White and those from non-Christian
backgrounds: groups comprising growing minorities - and in some cases
outright majorities - in Australian society

In the past, justice was the justificatory principle behind demands by
such groups for greater representation in the creative engine room of
Australian culture, including among those who interpret the news. In the
era of blogs, it may be proprietorial self-interest that finally sees
things change.