---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2007-12-30
title: 'The Futility of Treatment: Who Decides?'
---
Blink and you’d miss it. That’s the fate of stories in the lead-up to
Christmas, even explosive ones about the questionable withdrawal of
life-sustaining treatment from unconscious patients like Paulo Melo.

But we need to remember twenty-nine year old Paulo, critically injured
in a car accident in Kakadu National Park on December 5th. Just under
two weeks later, his family were in court, resisting the hospital’s
decision to discontinue life support. They failed, and on December 19th
Paulo’s treatment was withdrawn. He died around 16 hours later.

Disputes between doctors and families about the advisability of
continuing treatment in such circumstances are rare. Families that
reject medical advice tend to be either deeply religious, struggling to
come to grips emotionally with the tragedy they face, or convinced
they’ve witnessed signs of recovery that doctors - having already handed
down their prognosis - refuse to countenance.

The Melos, who had a Priest by their son’s bed in his final hours, who
begged the hospital to let Paulo survive until after Christmas or New
Year and then “we can see,” and who insisted to the end that Paulo was
showing signs of recovery, could fairly be described as all three. There
is little doubt their determination to preserve Paulo’s life exasperated
the medical team at the Royal Darwin Hospital. “We have tried in every
way to prepare this family for the withdrawal of the mechanical
ventilation,” Dr Diane Stevens was quoted at the final hearing as
saying. “We have already…given [them] more than a week to understand
that he is not going to survive this terrible accident and injuries”.

For Dr Stevens, the medical prognosis was clear, and justified the
Hospital’s decision to withdraw treatment from Paulo. “[The medical
team] felt strongly that we could not continue the mechanical
ventilation as it was futile therapy,” she told the court in a sworn
statement. “We feel strongly it is not ethical to continue with futile
therapy”.

Justice Mildren of the Supreme Court of the Northern Territory appeared
convinced, citing the futility of further treatment as one of the
grounds for denying a continuation of the orders restraining the
hospital from withdrawing Paulo’s life support. “The difficulty here is
that the only evidence before me suggests that continuing with the
current treatment of this patient is futile…There is no evidence to the
contrary”.

Everyone, doctors most of all, know there comes a point when patients
are overmastered by their disease and medicine is powerless to
intervene. The problem has been defining this point with the precision,
accuracy and ethical cogency required to guide clinical behaviour.

Is treatment one with a 1% chance of success “futile”, or does one with
a 10% chance qualify? And how, and by whom, should such vital
probabilities be calculated? Research warns doctors against relying on
their experience, which is biased towards recollection of cases that
went wrong, but robust and reliable data is often lacking. Even where it
exists, its relevance to particular cases is not always clear. And
doctors can be wrong. In 2000 the courts had to twice restrain those at
Sydney’s Royal Prince Alfred Hospital from withdrawing “futile”
treatment from a comatose 37 year old man whose sister, keeping vigil at
the bedside, insisted was improving. The man eventually recovered.

Perhaps most critically, medical futility does not provide a values-free
tool by which medicos - and courts - can make objective decisions about
withdrawing treatment. Instead, it but a mechanism by which medical
values are allowed to trump those held by non-compliant families of
critically ill patients. In a recent edition of the British Medical
Journal, Charles Weijer and Carol Elliott explain how clashes between
doctors and families over withdrawing treatment are “not about the
probability that an intervention will work but about the goals that it
will serve”. For some families, human life - even unconscious life - is
of greater value than considerations of that life’s quality. In this
context, the medical ethicists argue, describing as “futile” treatments
that preserve what may be permanently unconscious life is “suspiciously
like trying to redefine a debate about conflicting values into a debate
about medical probabilities. And as doctors are generally the sole
arbiters of medical probability this amounts to saying to families,
\`Your values don’t count’”.

Luckily, there is a better way.

Since the late 1990s, a bevy of experts have been arguing that our
inability to define futility objectively requires us to focus on
developing a fair process for reaching decisions about withdrawing
treatment. The American Medical Association, for instance, advocates
that every institution develop and adhere to such a policy, which should
include joint decision-making, negotiated resolution of disagreements
and, if when all else fails, opportunities for families to transfer care
of their loved one to another doctor. Only when no doctor or hospital
will accept the patient, may treatment be withdrawn.

The aim of such a policy is not to resolve the values conflict at the
heart of disagreements about withdrawing treatments, but to ensure the
power to decide is distributed fairly between the doctors who deal with
these situations everyday, and shocked and grieving families forced to
confront it for the first time.