---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2007-12-24
title: A Man Worth Emulating
---
*In our society, who best reflects Jesus’ compassion and sense of
justice?*

In recent years, courtesy of the Culture Wars, complaints about the
absence of Jesus, or Christianity more generally, from the gusto-filled
way Australians celebrate Christmas have crowded our newspapers and
clogged the airways. This year, In contrast, has been quieter. A pointed
indicator, perhaps, of the emphatic eviction of John Howard from the
Lodge, and the promise made by the new tenant of a kindler, gentler
approach to the demands of multi-cultural and multi-religious Australia.

So what better time for a secular Jew to talk about Jesus? To draw a
clear line under the terrible decade of narrow-mindedness, intolerance
and absolutism of the past decade by recalling who the historical figure
of Jesus of Nazareth was and what he sought to achieve. And, in so
doing, clear a space at everyone’s holiday celebrations - religious,
secular or otherwise - to commemorate this justice-seeking defender of
the dispossessed.

A potted history of the life and time of Jesus would include the fact
that he was an outsider. Illegitimate and poor in a culture where a
man’s standing and status among his fellows was entirely dependent on
his relationship with God. But the privilege of being seen in the eyes
of God as an Israelite, a member of the chosen people, was not available
to everyone. Certain people were ruled out on the basis of
characteristics they neither controlled nor could change - gender for
instance - while others, the sick and those involved in unclean
occupations like fishing or tanning, required purification to earn God’s
forgiveness, and so be welcomed back into the community of upright
citizens.

But the cost of forgiveness was high, and controlled by the Priestly
caste of Jews who ran the Temple in Jerusalem. Not only did all Jews at
that time pay a tithe to the Temple, they were also required to fork out
for individual rituals - incense- burning, the offering of loaves and
the sacrifice of animals - ordered to alleviate sin and guilt. But while
the Priests and their families were the sole beneficiaries of the
resulting largess, the penitent had no guarantees his offering would
achieve the desired ends. In fact, the failure of a sacrifice to cure an
infirmity might make matters worse, confirming God’s continued judgement
of the sick person as beyond redemption.

That the Temple was corrupt was a widely held view at the time. Jesus’s
contribution was to imply that it was also unjust. As he criss-crossed
the Galilee offering forgiveness and healing to the unclean - those
literally cast outside the gates of their villages and towns to cleanse
spiritual pollution - his implicit claim was clear. A relationship with
God, and access to the Kingdom of Heaven, was open to all. That this
included women and others deemed inherently “unclean” is evidenced not
just by his many female disciples and benefactors, but by Jesus’s
explicit rejection of notions of immutable male supremacy to which many
of his followers were attached. When, in the Gospel of Thomas, Simon
Peter calls for Jesus to dismiss Mary as disciple because she is “not
worthy of life,” Jesus replies that he will “guide her to make her
male…for every female who makes herself male will enter heaven’s
kingdom”.

While clearly lacking a contemporary feminist sensibility, such remarks
were radical for the time, entertaining the possibility that those the
privileged and powerful deemed less than fully human (deservedly
marginalised and dispossessed, in other words) were capable of being
seen by God and of reaping all the social status and privileges this
entailed.

So who among our moral leaders is most like Jesus of Nazareth? Is it
President of Liberty Victoria’s Julian Burnside QC who battles for the
rights of the poor to legal representation and for formal justice for
two of the most reviled groups in western societies: prisoners in
Guantanamo Bay and asylum seekers? Or Cardinal George Pell, who leads
the fight against the ordination of women and in a recent book of essays
accused Catholics who allowed their consciences to shape their values -
, rather than dictates from the Church hierarchy - of “Donald Duck
heresy”? Is Dr Jo Wainer, a woman who has dedicated much of her life to
fighting for legal and social recognition of women’s full humanity, a
true disciple of Jesus? Or it is Danny Nalliah, President of Catch the
Fire Ministries and one-time Family First candidate, who asks his
parishioners to pray that God will “pull down” what he calls [Satan’s
strongholds]() brothels, gambling places, bottle shops, mosques and
Freemasons, Buddhist, Hindu and other Temples?

Knowledge of the history of Jesus the man makes the answers clear.

Jesus of Nazareth was a spiritual activist and political radical who
made enormous personal sacrifices to bring his vision of a more
compassionate, inclusive and just world to fruition. It is those who
behave as Christians - a sometimes different group to those claiming to
be them - who keep Jesus’s radical, truth-seeking, cage-rattling, spirit
alive

So, as we head off to the beach this summer for a well-earned rest, let
us remember to honour our modern day Jesus of Nazarereths: the men and
women who find inequity offensive, and fight for justice for the most
benighted in our community, often at great personal, professional and
financial costs. And let us find time to consider how, when 2008 rolls
around, we might engage in a bit of radical, truth-seeking cage-rattling
of our own. The sort of cage-rattling designed to make a real difference
for one of the oppressed, marginalised, forgotten or dispossessed groups
in the Australian community who quietly thirst for justice.

The sort of cage-rattling that might just turn 2008 into a year to make
Jesus proud.