---
assets: ~
published: 2007-02-01
tags: ~
title: Let Us Decide for Ourselves on Euthanasia
---
The hypocrisy of the Coalition government on issues of personal choice
is breathtaking. While supporters of restrictions on junk food
advertising to children or universal minimum workplace conditions are
“nanny state” advocates, blanket prohibitions on the capacity of
terminally ill Australians to control the time and manner of their own
deaths are claimed to show adequate respect for individual choice.

International and Australian surveys repeatedly show strong public
support for euthanasia. A 2002 Morgan survey found 70% in favour of laws
allowing hopelessly ill patients to seek assistance from doctors to
suicide. Seventy-five per cent of sitting members in the last Victorian
parliament supported the rights of the terminally ill to die with
dignity.

Such figures may explain why opponents of a right-to-die rarely mention
the religious and ideological principles behind their stand and focus
instead on pragmatic objections to legal change. These include claims
that patient-controlled death will undercut efforts to improve
palliative care, that proper pain management always alleviates
suffering, and that only what Juliette Hughes (Opinion 30/1) calls “the
desperate, lonely, depressed and in pain” (ie those lacking autonomy)
choose death over palliation.

Oregon, Belgium, the Netherlands and Switzerland allow medicos to
respond to patient requests for active assistance to die. Empirical
evidence from these jurisdictions does not support claims that the
legalisation of assisted suicide for the terminally ill undercuts the
quality of palliative care. This makes sense, as only around 2% of
terminally ill patients make use of their legal right to assisted
suicide. The remainder continue to choose palliative care.

A phenomenal 77% of Australians disbelieve the repeated insistence of
right to die opponents that modern palliative care sufficiently
addresses the suffering of the terminally ill. The decision of John
Elliot - a medical doctor - to suicide in Zurich last Thursday suggests
he didn’t believe it either. Or, alternatively, that he understood that
suffering is not limited to physical pain but includes the loss of one’s
wits, privacy with regard to bodily functions and the capacity to
present oneself to others - including one’s spouse and children - as one
would like to be seen. Anticipation of uncontrolled pain as well as the
loss of such personal dignity appears a major motivator of Elliot’s
decision to die: “My disease has dictated that…I will die in pain. Worse
than this, though, I will have no dignity in death. I don’t want my wife
Angelika to see me in this way…. I want to exit this world…with my head
held high.”

At the heart of the right-to-die case are claims about the entitlement
of citizens to autonomously choose to live what they define as a good
life, and die what they see as a good death. But Liberal democratic
societies have no obligation to honour the wishes of the incompetent or
the coerced. This is why those opposed to the legal right to die use
language - “knocked off” or “put to death” - that assumes what must be
proved: that those other than the terminally ill will dictate the ifs
and whens of an assisted suicide.

Circular definitions help “prove” their case. For right-to-die
opponents, only the depressed choose death over palliation, and
depressed patients can’t make autonomous choices. Similarly, it is
claimed that patients who are loved and adequately cared for will not
choose to die, rendering all who do make this choice necessary victims
of coercion by penny-pinching medical administrators or avaricious
relatives.

Dr Elliot was wealthy, educated, not depressed, and consistent about his
desire to die. But his life was not perfect. His wife was open about the
burdensome nature of his care. In his recitation of his reasons for
choosing death Elliot includes the fact that he had burdened her for
“too long already”.

Do decisions to die that reference the needs or influence of important
others, or society at large, lack the independence necessary for us to
heed them? Those opposed to individual choice in personal moral matters
say “yes”. Abortion opponents argue that an “abortion culture” pushes
women to undertake “unwanted” abortions. Men who fail to offer women the
financial or emotional support they want to continue the pregnancy
“coerce” women into abortion in the same way as inadequately sacrificing
relatives compel the terminally ill to “choose” death.

The truth is that if choices were only available to those with perfect
lives, few of us would quality. It is one thing to point out that social
conditions may constrain the freedom of individuals to choose by
depriving them of the full range of options, or the capacity to choose
between them. It’s another to say that less than ideal choice is no
choice at all. As well, arguments that the addition of
physician-assisted suicide to the range of options available to the
terminally ill somehow reduces their freedom to choose make no sense at
all.

We’ve been here before. Thirty years ago radical feminists insisted that
a pro-natalist culture and coercion from “techno-docs” made the choices
of infertile women to undertake IVF unworthy of the name. These
feminists claimed that the incapacity of “vulnerable” infertile women to
choose, plus the damage they claimed the technology posed to women as a
group, justified banning it.

Resentful of being patronised, many infertile women returned fire.

Choices made in an imperfect world are still worthy of respect, they
insisted. By all means, fix the world to expand our options further. But
in the meantime, leave us with the freedom to decide between the options
that are available, according to our needs and values.