---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2007-11-05
tags: ~
title: I Feel Guilty, My Son is at Public School
---
Ive been wanting to write this column all year, but dreading it, too.
Because I don’t want to be misunderstood and I don’t want to offend. But
the truth is that there is something horribly rotten going on in my
personal world and \_ because the personal is political \_ this nation.
The rot comes from the way we fund our schools. And it is making me so
angry (or is it so grief-stricken and guilty?) that I can hardly breath.

The Federal Government’s education policy, and that of the Rudd
Opposition, waxes lyrical about parental choice. But while most of the
parents I have known since our babies napped side by side at creche
ummed and ahed between private schools A, B and C \_ and the one local
public school \_ our finances meant that even though several of the
independent schools are just down the street from our house, my choice
was between the local public school and well, the local public school.
Some choice.

For every dollar the Federal Government spends on a child in public
school, $5.63 is expended on a child in a Catholic or other
non-government school. Among OECD countries, Australia ranks third in
the amount of public money spent on private education. In the last
budget, federal funding to private schools increased by $1.7 billion
over five years, while public got just $300 million over the same
period.

Despite the stark disparity of such figures, parents of public school
kids find it hard to cry foul. Mainly, I think, because of a fear that
doing so makes us look like we believe money is everything, and that
admitting the truth - that depriving public schools of funds makes
private schools “better” - damages our kids’ schools even more. The
truth is that public school teachers and administrators are the moral
heroes of our time, sewing more silk purses from the sow’s ears of tatty
and diminishing resources than nearly any other group of professionals.
And there should be no underestimating the toughness of the job.

Look, I know that gardens, swimming pools, music rehearsal rooms, dining
areas, grassy quadrangles, polished floors, school-wide climate control
systems, post–1957 plumbing, regulation sized ovals and the organised
sporting teams that go with them aren’t the heart and soul of a good
education. I know because my son’s secondary school doesn’t have any of
them.

But what about enough specialist teachers to ensure adequate interest
and diversity in the curriculum? Enough to craft the specialised
curriculum required by students at the top and bottom end of the bell
curve? Class sizes appropriate to the subject being taught? Can anyone
really suggest these are peripheral to the central function of secondary
schooling? Yet, here too, our school struggles.

The justice issues here are so acute they hurt. In what way do the 70
per cent of children attending public schools deserve to miss out on the
resources necessary for them to obtain the fundamentals of a good
education when the remaining 30 per cent get enough for this, and so
much more? Why do only the wealthiest parents in the community, and the
most religious, deserve a real choice about where they educate their
kids?

But what I really want to talk about is how it feels to be a parent who,
week after week, and \_ as I look into the future \_ year after year
watches her child trek out the door to spend all day in an institution
that try as it might (and it does really try) cannot meet his
educational needs. A parent who struggles daily with the worst of all
parental emotions: the feeling that she is letting her child \_ this
beautiful, intelligent, eminently worthy creature whom she loves more
than life itself \_ down.

Because while not a bad school, I always knew it was not the best school
for him. Not best for him because he loves art, but several of the art
teachers are known terrors. Not for him because he’s passionate about
sport but there are no pitches or pools, coaches or competitions. Not
for him because he is a talented student and \_ while there are signs of
change \_ ideological resistance persists to catering for kids who need
extension rather than remediation.

“I want to go to Private School A,” he said a few months ago, after
hearing his closest friend rave about his school camp, curriculum
options and sporting tutelage. \`\`We can’t afford it," I replied. He
won’t ask again. He can see how frustrated I am at my inability to give
him the wonderful educational opportunities we both see dispensed like
lollies all round us; how sad and guilty I feel that despite the fact
that we are doing the best we can, our best isn’t good enough. He knows
I need to stop thinking about, so I can breathe.

It doesn’t have to be like this. True, the gleeful dismantling of the
public education system by the Howard Government seems more than OK by
Rudd’s ALP, which recently pledged to preserve the inequitable funding
formulas that has caused this unjust mess. “No [Schools] Hit List,” a
recent Labor press release trumpeted to The Parents Who Matter. But for
parents like me, there will be no Help List either. Instead, Kev has
offered to pay part of the cost of a laptop. Thankfully the Greens and
the Democrats have policies that are far better. Can you imagine how
different things would be,if the 70 per cent of parents whose children
would benefit from them sent first preferences their way?