---
assets: ~
excerpt: |-
  Infertility sucks and IVF is worse. Yet women rarely talk about
  either, or make jokes, a truth Jodi Panayotov found out the hard way
  when aged 37 she struggled to get pregnant and to stay that way.
link: ''
published: 2007-10-12
tag: writings
title: Book Review - In Viro Fertility Goddess by Jodi Panayotov
---
In Viro Fertility Goddess by Jodi Panayotov. Blink Press, June 2007, pp.
218. ISBN 978~~0~~9803110~~0~~6

Infertility sucks and IVF is worse. Yet women rarely talk about
either, or make jokes, a truth Jodi Panayotov found out the hard way
when aged 37 she struggled to get pregnant and to stay that way.

It never fails to amaze me the insensitive things people say to women
who, after a few years of wedded bliss, fail to spawn. The comment by
Panayotov’s fellow stewardess is typical. “You’ve been married for years
now, when are you going to have a baby?”

How I wish all women would react as Panayotov did that day. “Actually, I
just lost one, miscarriage you know.”

When a non-pregnant stewardess approaches Panayotov shortly after this
incident to confide that she’d also had a miscarriage but had only told
her family about it, Panayotov responds with a question revelatory of
the driving motivation behind In Vitro Fertility Goddess. “Why is it we
don’t talk about it? It’s like there ‘s a hidden code of silence of
something. I’ve never in ten years of working here heard of one
miscarriage. And I’ve heard all about every birth.”

In Vitro Fertility Goddess is Panayotov’s attempt to talk, even laugh,
about the reproductive difficulties faced by she and her husband Michel.
From the early days of her journey where repeated miscarriages saw her
join “the freakish underclass somewhere between the Fertile and
Infertile” that only exists on “obscure websites” because “nobody…admits
to being [a] member,” to Panayotov’s reluctant commencement of IVF,
Infertility Treatment Goddess contributes to the growing recognition
that women suffer psychic and physical costs not just when they are
unable to control their bodies and their lives in order to avoid having
children, but when such control eludes them when they try to conceive.

In Vitro Fertility Goddess has much going for it. Taking a stylistic
leaf out of Bridget Jones’s Diary it is at times laugh-out-loud funny. A
medical receptionist retreats when a miscarrying Panayotov yells at her,
“as if a large dog has mounted and is attempting to have sex with her.”
When Panayotov confesses to seeing a herbalist to cure her fertility
woes, her IVF doctor goes “all quiet,” as if she were confessing to
“joining the Branch Davidians or something.” And like Brigette Jones, it
promises and delivers an insight into the minds of women whose
circumstances rather than choices have derailed their lives from
conventional female courses, and a conclusion (one we know about from
the start courtesy of the mother-baby photo gracing the book’s back
cover) that rewards the heroine’s struggles with happy-ever-afters.

What works less well is the unevenness of the book’s tone and style, the
unreflective way the text conflates embryos and babies and the
unmitigated bitchyness of the author’s lambasting of fertile women as
either “smug pregnants” or selfish aborters whose mere existence
demonstrates an insensitivity to Panayotov’s plight that makes her wish
to purchase a voodoo doll so she can prick them in effigy.

Few, if any of these not insubstantial problems, are Panayotov’s fault.
Authors are not editors, and this book reads like the first draft a
promising manuscript, rather than the final text of a published work.
Grammatical errors, contradictions and repetitiveness (we are told twice
about a neighbour’s front window sticker welcoming dogs but not
children, and as many times about the unsavoury details of the clinic
masturbation room in which husband Michel fulfils his end of the IVF
bargain), the loss of Bridget Jones voice during parts of the narration
and a complete absence of humour during what was clearly the most
emotionally trying part of the Panayotovs’ journey to parenthood are
just the sort of problems the editorial process is designed to identify
and assist the author to address.

That it failed to do so, and that Panayotov’s editor was her husband
Michel, not only underscores the essential nature of editing to the
production of quality Australian literary works, but the need for that
editorial input to be professional: both skilled and impartial.