---
assets: ~
published: 2007-02-15
tags: ~
title: There is a Case for Staying the Course
---
I marched on the streets of Melbourne to express my opposition to the
war and Australia’s involvement in it. From the trumped-up and
ultimately fictitious casus belli, the predicted unpreparedness of the
invading forces to win the peace and the incompetent and corrupt
reconstruction process, the war’s prosecution has fulfilled - indeed
exceeded - every gloom-and-doom prediction of the nay-sayers.

Being able to acknowledge mistakes is a sign of good character and a
necessity for decision-makers charged with the making of policy into the
future. Yet it is hard to quibble with the assessment of New York Times
columnist Paul Krugman that the Bush Administration has an
“infallibility complex” and a “Captain Queeg-like inability” to own up
its own leadership failures in Iraq.

Yet, despite my belief we should never have gone to war, and my
agreement that a fulsome apology for past errors from the war’s leaders
is long overdue, I am not convinced that withdrawing our troops - now or
according to a pre-set timeline - is the right thing to do. Anti-war
politicians and commentators suggest that the failure of the Coalition
of the Willing to avoid the war in the first place and to prosecute it
competently and honestly once involved, provides ground for us withdraw
from Iraq, immediately or in the near future. But I think the opposite
may be true: that it is precisely because the Coalition has made such a
mess in Iraq that we may be obliged to stay.

The thinking behind this conclusion is not revolutionary. Say the fire
brigade arrives at your house and despite a complete lack of evidence of
any fire, sprays water everywhere, causing serious damage to building
and furnishings. You would expect the brigade to accept responsibility
for doing whatever you nominated as necessary to put things to right
(drag carpets into the sun, pay to replace the sofa). You would expect
this even if the entire mess had been caused by their mistakenly coming
to your door rather than the burning house down the street, or the lack
of wisdom or experience that saw them let loose despite not seeing any
flames. Columnist Thomas Friedman calls this the pottery store rule of
causal obligation: you break it, you own it.

Iraq Body Count estimates that a minimum of 56,102 Iraqi civilians has
been killed by the war in Iraq. According to press reports, child
malnutrition has doubled since the invasion, reaching levels in poor
African countries. Bagdad residents suffer 70% unemployment, receive
less than 6 hours a day of electricity and mostly live with sewage and
without potable water. Precipitous declines in household incomes since
the war mean that half the country’s people now live below the poverty
line.

Today’s Iraq is indeed broken, and good arguments can be made that this
is in substantial part a consequence of the war and the Coalition’s
failings when it came to the hard work of “winning the peace”.

Despite this, it is the rare politician who takes account of our
obligations to the Iraqis for the mess we’ve made in propounding their
proposed solution to the crisis. Instead, the case for surging,
super-surging, downscaling or withdrawing is largely made with reference
to the demands of protecting US prestige, fostering national or world
security or avoiding further troop losses. Many commentators, well aware
of appalling moral breaches in the conduct of the war (ranging from the
ritual humiliation of Iraqi prisoners in Abu Ghraib prison to the
construction by contractors with strong links to the Bush administration
of key building projects that leak human sewage through the walls) have
adopted a similarly self-referential line.

None of this is to say that American and Australian politicians and
commentators - not to mention the American and Australian peoples -
should not be concerned with the well-being of our troops, and the
security of our nations. We have obligations in this regard, too.
Rather, it is simply to note that it is unseemly to debate our future
involvement in conflict-ridden Iraq without reference to
responsibilities generated by our past decisions and their negative
consequences for Iraq’s civilian population.

How best to fulfil these obligations? Some might say a Coalition
withdrawal is the only way. The Bush administration has been so corrupt
and incompetent in its prosecution of the war and peace that the best
response to the resulting plight of Iraqis is to clear out of the way.
Alternatively, it could be argued that the only way for the US and
Australia to get it right in Iraq is to commit to doing whatever it
takes for as long as it takes to at least leave things - income levels,
child health, sanitation and security - as we found them (sans the
dictator of course, which could be our way of saying “sorry” for all the
intervening inconvenience and suffering).

It is this sort of debate that I think we should be having. One about
precisely what strategies will best enable us to meet our obligations to
our troops, ourselves and the civilians of Iraq. But first, we need to
get the moral foundations right.