---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2008-01-20
title: One-Size-Fits-All Marriage Model Fails to Bind
---
It’s built into our psyches. How could it not be, with marriage - and
the implied happy-ever-after - concluding every literary and cinematic
romantic tale? And then there’s the return of the elaborate, often white
wedding, costing on average (based on 2004 figures) $36,234. Social
research shows it, too. We, as a nation, particularly those in our
dotage, and those in our thirties, believe in the institution of
marriage.

Our divorce rate only confirms this, if you consider that 56% of
Australian men, and 45% of women have, or eventually will, tie the knot
again.

So are we idealists or mugs?

My verdict is mugs. Yes, the one-size-fits-all definition of marriage as
a lifelong romantic union of choice with “the one” person able to meet
our every emotional, intellectual and sexual need suits some. But for
others it is a recipe for disaster.

I can count the number of happy couples I know - or knew - on a single
digit. But for many the dissatisfactions are not global, but particular,
boiling down to malcontent in one key area, with the remaining
fundamentals solid. Despite this, and often amid cries of “don’t go for
second best” and “you deserve better,” one or both partners will call it
quits. In the aftermath, many will blame themselves for failing to be
for their partner, or to have found in them, their everything.

But are we failing at marriage, or is marriage failing us? If we stopped
blaming ourselves for failing to suit marriage, and started asking why
marriage doesn’t better suit us, would more of us stay together?

I say, “yes”. Marriage was designed to serve a number of purposes, but
most relevant to 21st century Australians is that of raising children.
Research suggests that unless there is violence, children do better in
intact families than divorced ones, even when parents fight. The reasons
for this are complex, but include the financial advantages of two-parent
households, and the dramas caused by divorce, and parental dating and
re-partnering which may distract children from focusing on - and parents
from supporting - their project of growing up.

We all have needs, some of which reflect at the most fundamental level
who we are, what we value and what we require to flourish. For some,
abandoning hope of having those needs met to maintain the marriage for
the children’s’ sake seems desperately old-fashioned and unfair. And so
the divorce.

The alternative - rarely discussed - is to renegotiate the marriage
contract. Key to such a process is the acknowledgement that the
inability of the relationship to meet all the needs of both partners is
the fault of neither, but the result of the inflexible, impersonal and
unrealistic demands of the institution of marriage itself.

For some, the freedom to negotiate the individual conditions required to
sustain the relationship could save the relationship in the long-term,
or at least until the kid leave home. While each individualised marital
contract will be different, mutual respect, attendance to parental
obligations and the primacy of the marital relationship over
extra-marital ones would be likely bottom-line conditions in most.

It may be that some people continue to opt for the standard “you are my
everything” marriage deal. But for others, tailored contracts with the
flexibilities required by the individuals involved could make the
difference between the despair that leads to divorce - with all its
misery for children - and the contentment that allows couples to stay
together.