---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2008-05-11
title: "What We Donâ\x80\x99t Know Can Hurt Us All"
---
What does independent research, shield laws and whistleblower
legislation have in common, and why should we give a rats?

Answer? All are essential for the creation and dissemination of the
quality information on which good decision-making - not to mention the
proper functioning of our democracy - depends.

Take the de-funding of universities. The insistence on successive
Australian governments on underfunding higher education has forced some
university researchers to rely on Big Pharma dollars. But the data from
industry-funded research is flawed for reasons that include a preference
for evaluations of patient outcomes in the short-term (they cost less)
and the reluctance of drug companies to publish results that show their
products don’t work at all, work less well than cheaper alternatives or
have worrying side effects.

This week’s police raid on the offices of the Sunday Times was another
assault on our right to know. Designed to unearth the source of a story
that embarrassed the Carpenter government, it followed last year’s
conviction of two journalists for contempt of court because they refused
to reveal a source, and the handing of a suspended sentence to a public
servant found guilty of leaking a report to the media that revealed
dangerous security breeches at Sydney airport. Perhaps this is why
Reporters without Borders recently ranked Australia 35th, equal with
Bulgaria but behind Bolivia and South Korea, on the press freedom index.

Attack on independent research, the free press and whistleblowers
violates the right of Australian citizens, and government
decision-makers, to access the independent, fulsome and reliable
information they need to make good decisions for themselves, their
families and the nation. Yet too often, the public dismisses calls by
academics for independent funding, and the demands of journalists for
shield and whistle-blower laws, as self-serving. Either that, or they
yawn.

But we need to get it. We need to understand that however abstract,
airy-fairy or hoity-toity concerns about independent research, press
freedom and whistleblowing sound, their absence is hurting each one of
us: putting our health at risk; undermining our democracy.

Did you know that the Australian government is now forced to rely on the
drug industry’s clinical trials to decide what medicines to subsidise
under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme? Think about it - your tax
dollars currently subsidise medicines that may be unnecessary,
ineffective or even dangerous.

Did you realize that when you open the newspaper each day there are
stories you won’t see because your friends, neighbours or colleagues
decided not to leak the information that would have informed you of a
dangerous incompetence or venal fraud in some key institution? That at
least one of the reasons they may have kept mum was a fear - in the
absence of comprehensive national whistleblower legislation - of being
publicly vilified, sacked or taken to court?

How can we keep our commercial and public sectors free of corruption, if
decision-makers know their immorality and errors will go with them to
their graves? Corrupt public institutions strike at the heart of
democracy itself, by undermining the rule of law, and replacing it with
the rule of powerful men, while a free press is essential to a
functioning democracy..

So next time you hear some academic thumping their chest about a loss of
funding, or a journalist bemoaning some restrictive government law or
practice, don’t tune out. What we don’t know can hurt us all.