---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2008-05-04
title: The Dubious Morality of Women
---
My speciality area of ethics is reproductive technologies. What this
means is that I spend much of my working life face-to-face with the
suspicions that religious men, political leaders and journalists have
about female morality.

At a meeting I attended, the capacity of women to make ethically
defensible choices about using pre-natal screening tests was openly
doubted. I was sent a copy of a pastoral letter signed by 7 male bishops
supporting ongoing penal sanctions against women who have abortions on
the grounds that they are guilty of a “grave moral disorder.” When an
insurance giant offered cover to women for pregnancy complications or a
child born with a birth defect, I was invited to reply to claims that
older mothers had brought the problem on themselves by delaying
childbirth.

And that was just this week.

Doubts about women’s moral agency date back to the Greeks. Plato argued
that “women’s nature is inferior to that of men in capacity for virtue”
and so more inclined to “secrecy and stealth.” More than 2000 years
later, Freud argued that women’s psychosexual development meant that
women “show less sense of justice than men.” In the late 1950s, a
soon-to-be influential moral psychologist named Lawrence Kohlberg
developed a six stage model of moral development that suggested it was
no accident that the Gandi’s and Martin Luther King’s of the world were
men. Women, because of an overemphasis on maintaining relationships,
failed to progress to the highest stages of judgement where
relationships were subordinated to rules and, ultimately, to universal
principles of justice.

But here’s the problem. The empirical evidence not only fails to support
the “men are more moral” thesis, but suggests the truth is the other way
around. A recent study of the giving habits of Americans found that
women not only make more charitable contributions than men, they are far
less likely than men to give because they can earn a tax deduction. Or
the findings of a study presented at a recent International Studies
Association conference that the higher the percentage of women in
legislatures, the more likely states were to use foreign aid, not
military spending or conflict escalation, to achieve their aims. We also
know that when it comes to education, women in the developing world are
the target for intervention because, as Greg Mortenson, the American who
has dedicated his life to building schools for girls in impoverished
areas of Pakistan and Afghanistan puts it, “If you educate a boy, you
educate an individual. If you educate a girl, you educate a community.”
The same goes for development aid that focuses on women because, says
the Equilibrium Fund, “improving conditions for women results in
improved conditions for the entire family.”

Does this mean every woman is a saint, and more saintly than a man? Of
course not, but what it does suggest is that if you had to pick winners,
you’d pick a woman every time.

But raising the moral superiority of women is a double-edged sword.
Author Julia Baird says that the “assumption…that women are cleaner,
more ethical than men…has been their greatest burden.” The higher the
pedestal, the harder the fall—just ask Carmen Lawrence and Cheryl
Kernot.

So perhaps we can agree to this. Men can stop insulting women’s imagined
moral failings, and women will agree to keep mum about men’s real ones.