---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2008-07-20
title: FairtTrade is Fair Enough
---
However cynical, petty, ideological and pathetically out-of-date it may
be, the attack by right-wing “think-tanks” on fair trade just won’t go
away.

As most coffee-drinkers know, Fairtrade (and its new competitor
Rainforest Alliance) are dedicated to increasing the ethical footprint
of western consumers by encouraging them to buy products that offer a
better deal to those in the developing world who make them. In essence,
fair trade schemes ask us to pay more for things we are told have been
farmed in a sustainable way by workers protected by International Labor
Organisation conventions.

Implicit in the very project of ethical consumerism is a critique of the
way we currently do business when it comes to global trade, and the
values that underlie the free trade ideal.

No wonder Tim Wilson, from the free market Institute of Public Affairs,
is pursed lipped. In an interview on ABC Radio National’s Background
Briefing Wilson claimed to be worried that consumers buying fair trade
products were being [duped]() “Developed country consumers are buying
these products with the expectation that the right thing is being done
by them and the developing world producers, and that isn’t always
occurring.”

The problems to which Wilson refers are ones that no one, most notably
Fairtrade officials and advocates, deny. Namely, that Fairtrade isn’t
perfect, and that one consequence of its imperfection can be a
disconnect between what consumers are promised for the premium they pay,
and what is delivered. For example, an investigation a few years ago by
the UK’s Financial Times, found that some fair trade farmers were not
paying their labour the legal minimum wage, though these workers were
getting 25% more than those picking coffee on conventional farms.

In an article on the IPA website, Wilson suggests that on the evidence
of history, such problems are without remedy. “The International Coffee
Agreement operated for most of the Cold War period to help developing
world coffee producers lift themselves out of poverty. It was a
monumental failure.”

Elsewhere he contends that even if fair trade could be made to work,
there is little reason to bother, because free trade provides all the
equity and justice this world needs: “Free trade has…worked for many,
many years now…The fairest outcome [results] from a system where prices
are set by the marketplace.”

Yeah, and pigs fly. Throughout history an unregulated market has brought
us gross disparities of wealth, corruption, child labour and sweatshops.
As that screaming left-winger Ben Bernanke, the chairman of the US
Federal Reserve, conceded in a recent speech, it has also delivered the
sub-prime mortgage crisis.

The IPA has long been funded by the major corporates: BHP-Billiton,
Monsanto, Caltex and Gunns to name a few. Businesses that have done well
from existing trade conditions and would like to see them roll on. We’re
still waiting for Peruvian coffee-growers to fund a think-tank. The
IPA’s objections to ethical consumerism are vested and ideological, in
other words, not a response to the occasional promise/reality gap that
the fair trade movement is working hard to fix.

It is easy for self-serving cynics to drain our idealism. Easy to make
us feel that however good our intentions and however much we try, there
is nothing we can do to make the world a fairer place. So we might as
well just shut up and shop.

Don’t believe the hype. While it’s neither enough nor perfect, ethical
consumerism is better than business-as-usual. Drink your coffee, join
the movement and keep the faith.