---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2008-11-16
title: Breaking the Glass Ceiling of Courage
---
The Bali Bombers are dead. When news of the executions came over the
wireless I found it hard to shed tears. These men were murderers and
tears are evidence of compassion. My opposition to the death penalty is
motivated by more principled and practical concerns.

Much attention was paid in coverage of the story of the courage-or lack
thereof-of one of the condemned men. Amrozi was described as “pale and
afraid” and the “least brave” of the three men. He was also, we were
informed, the “quickest to die.”

It’s easy to read between the lines. The Bali Bombers were cowards. They
talked tough but when tested turned out to be piss weak. Barely men at
all.

Such reportage dismays me. Firstly, because it wrongly suggests that the
murderous behaviour of religious fanatics is brave. Secondly, because it
implies that the absence of courag-or cowardice-is a particularly
grievous moral failing when seen in men.

Is courage a particularly male virtue? My teenage son seems to think so.
The dictionary defines courage as the capacity to withstand pain, danger
and uncertainty. Perhaps this is what he thinks he is doing when he
leaves the house throughout the winter months in a thin collared shirt
because the warm parts of the school uniform are “for girls.” He may
also think himself both male and brave when he returns from school with
a skateboard broken in two from some daredevil stunt performed before
the lunchtime crowd, then shares a smirk with this father when I worry
that it might have been his head. When he grows up, he’ll probably
refuse to go the doctor. Just like dad.

It’s all mindless peacock strutting in my view. Real courage is unisex,
a virtue of which both women and men are capable. To act with courage is
to act after some deliberation in a manner consistent with what we
believe, feel or know is right. Confronting a racist at a dinner party,
despite the risk of embarrassment, takes courage. Coming out as a
lesbian, as a colleague of mine did recently, so that younger gays in
her conservative profession would not feel so isolated takes courage. If
one is a homebody it takes courage to travel overseas and if one fears
getting hurt, falling in love is admirably brave. Former senator Linda
Kirk showed courage, with lashing of personal integrity, when she
supported stem-cell research and the removal of the Ministerial veto
over RU486 despite Catholic elements of the Labor party warning her she
would lose her preselection. In her book on the subject, Maria Tumarkin
reminds us of the courage of migrants, those who leave their language
and culture behind to seek a better life for themselves and their
children in the “ruinous unknown.”

Gender may play a small role in courage and its more impulsive cousin,
heroism. Women learn to give their lives for their children. Men learn
that women, children and frail aged men come first. Mathematically, this
gives men more people to protect, and so more opportunities to display
courage, when the bullets start flying.

But the gender connection with courage may be on its way out, if its not
part of the past already. Women today are doctors and emergency service
workers, while men can be the primary carers of their kids. Using gender
as a shorthand way of deciding who should be the hero in a modern crisis
may be past its use -by date.