---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2008-07-27
title: Teaching our Kids the Difference Between Science and Faith
---
Moral Maze: Teaching our Kids the Difference Between Science and Faith

Defeating the religious right’s latest attack on reason and evidence
requires beating them at their own game.

The current site of the controversy is the US, where Louisiana has
passed a law requiring the education bureaucracy to assist schools that
wish to help students “understand, analyze, critique, and review”
scientific theories like evolution, the origins of life, global warming,
and human cloning.

Intelligent design, or its forerunner creation science, in sheep’s
clothing? You betcha. But dressed up as academic freedom, the new law is
predicted to succeed in introducing biblical principles into the
classroom where those in more blatant contravention of the US separation
of Church and State have failed.

I’m on their side, but I reckon the opponents of this bill, and the many
predicted to follow it into legislatures across the country, need to
modify their language and tactics if they want to beat their wealthy,
dedicated and relentless opponent: the fundamentalist Christian
churches.

First and foremost, they need to get past their moral indignation at the
slick and cynical use by bible-bashers of the language and values of the
progressive left. To do this, they need to stop arguing against the
legislation on the grounds that Darwinian evolution is “accepted
scientific fact,” and get on with turning the stated goals of the new
“academic freedom” legislation to their advantage.

Because at the heart of this debate is not evolution, or any other
answer to key questions that the scientific method turns up at a point
in history, but the workings of the method itself. Currently, primary
and secondary school children are taught scientific content: the
conclusions of scientific investigation into questions like “how did
life on earth begin?” Only when students enter university, are the
methods used to reach such conclusions properly explained and used to
critique contemporary answers to key questions.

This is ass-around backwards. As business leaders have been telling us
for years, what we need in our rapid-fire world, where knowledge dates
faster than it takes to chew a piece of gum, is people who know how to
assess the value of new information and—where it is deemed valid and
valuable—to acquire it. People, in other words, who don’t know stuff,
but know how to think.

No matter how widely accepted it is today, no theory—including
evolution—is beyond question. The accumulation of enough
counter-evidence, or the successful questioning of the method or logic
used to develop the theory in the first place, will topple it in the
sort of paradigm shift that makes academic careers and defines human
progress. This is how reason and evidence-based systems, of which
science is one, work.

Only by accepting this, and by turning the ruthless objectivity of
reason and evidence-based systems to their advantage, can those seeking
to defend modern ways of knowing against pre-enlightenment ones based on
faith, tradition or plain superstition, prevail.

Perhaps the latest manifestation of creationism, and the threat it poses
to post-enlightenment ways of doing business, could prompt educators to
listen. To stop stuffing our primary and secondary school children with
reams of content certain to date, and to teach them instead to consider
the validity of the varying methods humans have tried over time to
decide what is right and true.

If they know this we won’t have to tell them that creationism, or
whatever theory the faith-based crowd decide to throw at us next year,
is something we can choose to believe it, but not something we can know.

They will be able to work this out for themselves.