---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2008-11-30
title: Let Women Speak for Themselves
---
For years, we’ve been tied up in knots, unsure how to protect the rights
of women in male-dominated religions and cultures.

In the past weeks, such conflicts have been writ large across the
national stage. In Melbourne, traditionally-garbed, western educated
Muslim women called for action in the wake of a report by the Islamic
Women’s Welfare Council of Victoria showing that some Imams support rape
within marriage, domestic violence, polygamy and welfare fraud. Women at
the conference where the report was presented expressed hope that making
their concerns public would assist Muslim women to access the rights
guaranteed to them by Sharia and Australian law.

At the same time, Minister Jenny Macklin had decided to maintain
mandatory income management and other controversial aspects of the
Northern Territory intervention, despite some Aboriginal men and a
number of white-fellas in NSW and NT branches of the ALP labeling it
racist and against Aboriginal culture.\
Her reason? Many Aboriginal women like it. Walpiri woman Bes Nungarrayia
says that in her community, women and young people support income
management because it gives them more control of their money and lives.
Data from government-registered community stores suggests that Walpiri
women and children are not alone, with more money being spent on fresh
food and household essentials, and less on gambling, alcohol and
pornography since the policy began.

It would be easy to get confused. Easy to think that for minority women,
religious and cultural rights are instruments of oppression, not
liberation. Easy to conclude that the protection of minority women and
children sometimes requires religious and cultural rights to be put
aside.

But the problem isn’t rights. It’s representation.

The Australian community is not monolithic, but a complex jigsaw of
religious, ethnic and cultural groups. Years ago we realized that the
needs and aspirations of one group need to be articulated by them, not
by members of the majority. It is because we understand that Christians
shouldn’t speak for Muslims, nor whitefellas for black, that we sought
to involve minority representatives in decisions that affect them.

Where we erred-and continue to do so-is in passively accepting whatever
representative such communities throw up. The problem is that some
representatives aren’t representative at all, because the process that
delivered them was undemocratic, non-existent, biased or rigged. One
sure sign this is the case is where a community is fifty percent women,
yet those who represent them are always male.

Muslim educator Silma Ihram made this point recently when she spoke of
the difficulty Muslim women have getting a “platform” within their own
communities. Journalist Russell Skelton says Aboriginal culture is
dominated by “male thinking” and “powerful [male] figures,” making it
poor at ensuring Aboriginal women always sit at the decision-making
table.

But if representation is the problem, it is the answer, too.

It is true that women’s rights and religious/cultural rights may
sometimes clash, but this is not inevitable. One reason it is happening
so often now may be for no other reason than the undemocratic processes
by which some minority communities choose representatives, and the
inevitable consequence of this: that the decisions these representatives
leave the issues and concerns of significant parts of their own
community out.

From now on, we need to do things differently. When we ask minority
groups what their religion and culture dictates, and what their
community needs, we need to ensure the answer comes from both women and
men.