---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2008-12-21
title: Lars and the Real Girl Show Us the Way
---
It’s that time of the year again. No matter what we believe or
commemorate, December offers most of us a few days off work. A chance to
reflect on what really matters in our complex, crowded lives, and how it
can be nurtured so more will grow.

An Israelite sage living around the time of Jesus said that Jewish
teaching could be summarized as, “That which is hateful to you, do not
do to your fellow.” The rest, said Hillel, was commentary.

It can be nice to have the take-home message distilled. When that
message is the Golden Rule, few disagree. Upwards of forty religions,
and a posse of secular philosophers, have a version of the claim that
compassion and love, not holier-than-thou judgment, should be central to
ethics.

Sometimes though, the sheer ubiquitousness of a message can rob it of
its power. It was Stalin who observed that while one death is a tragedy,
a million is just a statistic. Most of us need stories about
three-dimensional people negotiating real-world dilemmas to fire our
imaginations and shift our hearts. Leaving us cold teaches us nothing.

Because of this, I observed my vow to watch less TV this year. Instead,
I read more, and watched more movies. I wanted to stop observing facts
in my head, and understand them better through my heart.

My favourite read was *The Sorrows of an American*, a stunningly written
exploration of the big questions raised by 9–11 through the reflections
of the book’s protagonist on the connections between his own
past-personal and historical-and present.

But the gong goes to *Lars and the Real Girl*, out on DVD this year.

*Lars and the Real Girl* is not about sex, but love of the Golden Rule
sort, despite what a one line summary of the plot-small town boy becomes
obsessed with mail order doll-might suggest.

The problem is that Lars is deluded. He thinks the doll, Bianca, is real
and that he is in love with her. The town doctor, also a shrink, thinks
Lars’ only hope of recovery is if everyone, including Lars’ brother Gus,
and Gus’s wife Karin, play along. “But everyone will laugh at him,” Gus
protests. “And you too,” the doctor agrees.

But they don’t. No one laughs. Not Karin’s friends, or Gus’s workmates
(“Wish I had a woman that couldn’t talk,” says one. “She have a sister?”
inquires a customer). Even the church elders eventually get on board.
“We don’t want anything to do with her,” protests Arnie. “She’s a golden
calf. And we all know what happened with that.”

“Oh, for heaven’s sake! What’s the big deal!” snaps Mrs Grinner,
addressing each of the group in turn. “Sally, your cousin puts dresses
on his cats. Hazel, your nephew gave all his money to a UFO club. Arnie,
everyone knows your first wife was a klepto…These things happen. Lars is
a good boy. You can depend on me.”

History and philosophy tend to focus on great moments of choice faced by
important people. What I loved about *Lars* was its poignant recognition
that the religious turn foul when they forget the Golden Rule, and that
there is nothing exotic about ethics. They can be found in the everyday
acts and omissions of us all.

I am constantly moved by how hard people try to be moral, and how often
they get it right.

Thanks for taking the time to read and write to me this year. Happy
holidays to you all.