---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2008-06-15
title: Feel Good, Do Good - The Merry Makers
---
OK, I admit it. I cry easily. My eldest’s grade 6 graduation ceremony
provoked a flood. Even k.d. lang’s version of Hallelujah can do it. When
the face of the little fella in the Worksafe Victoria ad lights up
because his Dad is safe and home, I break down in sobs.

But this week was a first. This week I saw a documentary so moving that
even now, days later, the thought of it brings tears to my eyes.
Reviewing the trailer in preparation for writing this column, I broke
down again. Pushing my keyboard aside I put my head on the desk, and
bawled.

The Music in Me, presented by that national treasure Andrew Denton,
features the Merry Makers, a troupe of intellectually and physically
disabled performers aged six to 56, and the two wonderful women-mother
and daughter team, Janet and Lucinda, who have dedicated their lives to
putting these dancers on stage.

When the credits rolled I found myself pondering, tissue-box in lap, why
the Merry Makes tale is so inspiring. While articulate about all other
aspects of the troupe, neither Lucinda nor Janet could explain why-in
Janet’s words-a Merry Makers’ performance “just generates love and joy
and happiness, and no one wants to go home.”

I think I know. Firstly, is because the Merry Makers replace disgrace
with pride. The film is unflinching in its exploration of the shame
parents feel, or are made to feel by others, when a disabled child-one
with Down’s syndrome or Fragile X or cerebral palsy-is born. “I felt
sick. My legs went to jelly. This can’t be happening to me, she’s too
beautiful,” recalls one mother. Another was told by her grandfather, as
the rest of her assembled family silently examined the new arrival,
“nothing like this ever happened in our family.”

But the Merry Makers is about celebrating ability, not disability. In
doing so, it allows the parents of special children to experience what
the rest of us take for granted: set-piece moments where we are
permitted to glory and gloat in our children’s accomplishments, and
accept the admiration of others for what they have achieved.

The climax of The Music in Me is the Merry Makers’ 2005 performance in
the Sydney Entertainment Centre alongside Marcia Hines, Todd McKenney
and John Paul Young.

When the Merry Makers take their bows to rapturous applause, you get the
feeling that this may be the first time in these people’s lives where
they are the object of honest admiration and praise. When the camera
follows Merry Makers into the audience where they are hugged and
congratulated by ecstatic family members, you wonder if this is the
first time these parents have been given permission to publicly revel in
their child’s accomplishments.

A Merry Makers performance offers something unique to audiences, too. We
live in a world designed to make people with disabilities and those who
care for them invisible. When we do see the disabled and their carers,
it is usually because something is wrong. Disabled people abused in
specialized accommodation or carers who lack respite care or are having
their allowances slashed.

This near-exclusive representation of the disabled in the wider
community as those in plight, deserving our pity and rescue (and, in the
event we fail to provide either, our guilt) put paid to the “love, joy
and happiness” offered by the Merry-Makers.

Feel good, do good. It works for the Merry Makers and, so it seems for
us, too.