---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2008-12-07
tag: writings
title: Should We Let the Gene Out of the Bottle
---
How much do you know about your genes? Does your genetic profile match
that of a sprinter, or is it more like an endurance athlete? Are you
lactose intolerant, malaria resistant, possessed of wet or dry ear wax
or at an increased risk, compared to others with similar ancestry, of
breast cancer, Crohn’s or Parkinson’s disease?

Welcome to the new world of retail genomic testing, where all you need
to find out is an internet connection, some spit and at least $500USD.

Proponents of retail genetic testing are set to make a packet, though
they claim that their desire to make the world a better place is what
truly makes them tick. The founder of 23andMe, for instance, insists
that giving us access to our personal genetic information will force the
medical profession to get across research evidence that points to the
genetic causes of disease, improving health care for all.

The company’s website also says they are keen to “contribute to…human
understanding” by handing over their genetic database-at an undisclosed
cost-to assist researchers to find out more about the links between
genes and disease.

They care about our social life, too, with swapping and comparing DNA
profiles on sites designed for the purpose set to become the next social
networking fad.

But opponents of retail genetic testing warn us to beware. They say that
the information provided by retail genetic testing is crude and
potentially misleading. Some companies are “harvesting” research data
before it is ripe, telling us that we have a risk of a disease on the
basis of one gene, for example, when far more are likely to be required.

Some are also worried about testing for conditions where no medical or
life-style fix is available. Why know what you can’t do anything about,
especially when you are obliged to disclose the information to your
medical insurer, who could increase your premiums or refuse to insure
you because of it? They also fret quality control, believing that any
profit-making entity in the business of telling people that Alzheimer’s
disease may be in their future needs to get it right.

Some objections to retail DNA testing are offensively paternalistic. The
claim that the information might frighten us smacks of the excuses
doctors used to give for refusing to tell patients they had cancer,
while the assertion that most of us won’t change our behaviour because
of what we learn says nothing about what any particular individual might
do. In any case, whether we want to act on the information or just know
it is our concern.

Clearly some regulation is required. 23andMe gives clients their
research reports in the context of a rating system that enables
consumers to easily grasp how much evidence is behind the results and so
how much weight should be given to them. This sort of system should be
standardized, rigorous and mandatory for all retail DNA companies. We
must also be able to trust that the information given to us is accurate
and conforms to all commonly accepted ethical standards, including those
relating to informed consent and privacy. I could even live with being
forced to have my results sent to my GP, and to have to make an
appointment to pick them up.

But banning consumers from ordering the tests or only allowing tests to
be done that have been proven “clinically useful” or requiring genetic
counselors to interpret the results is far too restrictive, and just not
fair.