---
assets: ~
published: 2008-11-23
tags: ~
title: Dumpers and Martyrs and None of Us Saints
---
There were a lot of contenders for this week’s column. The inevitable
arrival of paid maternity leave on the list of scuttled government
initiatives because of the global economic crisis was one. Minister
Stephen Conroy’s decision to capitulate to the demands of the religious
right and censor everyone’s internet access was another. And there’s a
piece inside me just screaming to get out about what former government
leaders must really think about the quality of reporting on the ABC
given their decision to participate in The Howard Years, the first
episode of which screened on ABC TV this week.

But I’ve decided to throw politics to one side and to focus instead on
matters far closer to home. To point the bone at wrong-doers far too
commonplace in my world-the dumpers and the martyrs.

Dumpers are those who treat the wide range of people who “do” their
“personal care” as emotional sinks. Cashed-up folk who act as if the men
and women they have paid to train them at the gym, cut and colour their
hair, trim and paint their nails, massage away their pains, peel and
scrub their faces and wax their backs or bikini lines are also being
paid to pamper their psyches.

Dumpers say things like this. “I was thinking about getting a bit of
fringe because I wanted something different. I am starting to look my
age.” They say, “You know what it’s like in London. And now the service
is even worse.” They say, “I went to that new gym I was telling you
about. Very reasonably priced but it was a bit rushed. I just want to go
afterwards and have my coffee and my afternoon but I just don’t know.
It’s so hard to know what to do.”

They say these things to hairdressers whose best friends will never grow
old because they died that week in a car accident. They say them to
manicurists who have never been to London and will never go because they
can’t afford to take a holiday. Ever. They say them to personal trainers
who have mortgaged themselves to the hilt to buy their own gym, but may
now go broke because their wives just left them.

Do dumpers know this? Most of them do, and if they don’t, they should.
They should because finding out requires nothing more then the temporary
shutting of their own trap, and the responding to the other like they
were an actual human being with worries and aspirations of their own,
rather than a creature who exists for no other purpose then to service
their needs.

Which brings me to the martyrs. Dumpers act like their most trivial
psychological desideratum is weightier than any needs of those lower
down on the food chain. Martyrs pretend they have no emotional needs at
all, then spend the time and energy necessary to achieve world peace in
manipulative efforts designed to get those needs met. How many
grandmothers does it take to change a light bulb? Oh don’t worry about
me, dear, I’ll just sit in the dark.

Martyrs snatch your coffee cup while you’re still packing up from the
meeting, then sigh and flounce as they do the washing up. They insist
that that the favour you’ve asked is no trouble, then spend the rest of
your natural life sniffing about ingratitude when the medal and monument
fail to arrive.

Refusing to ask for what you want, or to say no to what you don’t, is a
sure-fire recipe for dissatisfaction, but that’s OK because it is the
inevitable moral failures of others on which martyrs get off. They get
emotional satisfaction, in other words, from being the unrecognised
do-er of good deeds.

My friend, who grew up with a martyr, says you can’t win and you need to
stop trying. Instead, he advises, try to have fun. Leave long lists
detailing your requirements. Dirty as many dishes as you can. “They’re
going to feel hardly-done by, anyway,” he says, shrugging. “Might as
well make ‘em work for their pay.”