---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2008-03-16
title: "In Death We Donâ\x80\x99t Part from our Obligations"
---
Last week in New Zealand, Ivy May Ngahooro became the third body
snatched after disputes about burial between non-indigenous and Maori
relatives. The distress of Ms Ngahooro’s family was extensively covered
in the New Zealand press, with the will’s executor, niece Trish Scoble,
saying that the loss of the body made her feel both “sick” and
“frightened”. Scoble said that she would not stop until her Auntie May
was laid to rest as she had wanted.

The body snatching cases raises interesting legal issues. One is that
because New Zealand (like Australia) does not recognize bodies as
property, the unauthorized removal of Ngahooro’s remains did not
constitute theft or justify police intervention (though lawmakers in New
Zealand now appear ready to change this).

The moral issues are just as compelling. For some, the Auntie May case
was a storm in a teacup. Who cared where the woman was buried? Auntie
May wouldn’t because she was dead.

But is it really that simple? Can we simply disregard the wishes of the
deceased? Or are there things we owe to the dead?

Many moral thinkers, including Aristotle and Confucius, believed we did
have obligations to the dead. Every time we refuse to speak ill of them
or work to carry out their last wishes or insist they get justice when
their demise was the result of foul play, we strenuously agree.

But while we know that it would be wrong to override Dad’s request to be
an organ donor or for staff at the morgue to violate Mum’s body, it’s
hard to explain why. After all, being dead, neither Dad nor Mum are
likely to care.

But the end of a body doesn’t mean the end of a relationship. Just
because my mother’s dead doesn’t mean she’s not my mother. So while the
relationship demands of the dead are few, what demands there are can be
said to create obligations in the living.

In the same way that relationships carry forward beyond death, so too do
the interests of the dead person. It’s not hard to see why dead people
would maintain an interest in the fate of their body and organs, and the
protection of their memory, legacy and reputation. The law recognizes
these things by enforcing the terms of the deceased’s will.

The fact that the dead won’t know of our failure to protect their
interests doesn’t mean those interests don’t exist, and our failure
doesn’t count. If you pledge fidelity to your partner when you marry,
then sleeping with someone else make you a cheat and causes your partner
hurt, even if they never find out. And if you don’t scatter Dad’s ashes
in the Blue Mountains like he asked, the fact that he’ll never know
doesn’t mean he wasn’t harmed when you let him down.

The upshot? That even if the dead don’t know we’ve harmed them, they
have legitimate interests that can be harmed. These interests are ones
those of us bound by relationship to the dead are obligated to defend.

Of course, many of the laws and customs surrounding death protect the
interests and wellbeing of the living, too. For instance, restrictions
on savaging the dead protect those who loved them from the helpless hurt
of watching their memory and legacy tarnished.

But our obligations to the dead are stand-alone, too. Things we must do
because despite the loss of their bodies, the dead are still people,
too.