---
assets: ~
published: 2008-02-10
tags: ~
title: "Letâ\x80\x99s Get Rid of the Cloak and Dagger"
---
Transparency. In recent years, journalists, politicians and medical
researchers have joined lawyers and judges in accepting formal
obligations to either disclose personal or financial links they have
with those they report on or serve, to divest themselves of those links
or to recuse themselves.

This makes it odd then that, when it comes to government inquiries, the
moral obligations we all have to disclose, divest or recuse where
conflicts of interests exist, remain optional. I’ve given evidence at a
fair few inquiries and hearings, and while within the hearing room the
affiliations of certain witnesses-relevant links that may reveal fiscal
or moral conflicts of interest - are poorly-kept secrets, what happens
in the hearing room stays in the hearing room. When the final report
appears only those credentials that witnesses choose to disclose, rather
than all those the public might deem relevant, appear in print.

But this may be set to change, with a new report on by the UK Science
and Technology Committee confronting the issue of witness transparency
directly.

It all started when the Committee, appointed by the House of Commons,
undertook an investigation of scientific developments relating to the
Abortion Act of 1967. When submissions began arriving members noticed
that some doctors were opining on and interpreting evidence in areas in
which they had neither practiced, researched nor published. Turns out,
most of these contributions were from individuals who had a history of
active campaigning against a woman’s right to choose.

In line with its own previously articulated recommendations on
evidence-based policy-making, the committee swung into action, requiring
all witnesses to come clean and, in keeping with “accepted practice in
the scientific community,” disclose all relevant interests and
expertise, including previous publication of strong views on abortion,
or membership of organizations campaigning on the issue.

All hell broke loose. Some pro-lifers did come clean (Australia’s own
John Fleming, who in Australian debates on abortion tends to describe
himself as Dr Fleming from the Southern Cross Bioethics Institute, added
that he was also a Catholic Priest and President of Campion College,
itself linked with Christendom College whose mission is to make Christ’s
teachings the law of the land). But others refused, claiming to fear
that the truth would see their views discounted. Refusing to listen to
the Committee’s commitment that they would not, they insisted on their
entitlement to deny the public and lawmakers the whole truth about who
they were and where they came from.

At the heart of concerns about transparency are those about autonomy,
the Greek roots of which mean self-rule. To rule our lives we need full
and accurate information on which to base our decisions. Conflict of
interest disclosures help us decide how much weight to give to the
opinions and evidence offered us by those claiming to know. Ignorance of
all relevant facts about those seeking to influence us undermines the
integrity of our decisions, weakening our grip on our lives. Because it
may have been the case that if we had known the whole truth about the
person whose words and facts swayed us, we might not have given them so
much weight - and chosen differently - after all.

It is imperative that government inquiries in Australia follow the UK
lead and demand transparency from all those seeking to inform and
influence decision-makers and citizens about issues of public
importance. No more cloak and dagger. We need transparency.
Evidence-based policy decision-making simply can’t happen without it.