---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2008-03-02
title: Threat to Choice Leaves Bitter Taste in GM Debate
---
Some moral questions reduce to empirical ones. Where you stand and what
you’ll stand up for turns entirely on the facts.

Have the NSW and Victorian governments done the right thing by lifting
the moratorium on the commercial cultivation of genetically modified
crops, starting with canola? Both governments have sold the decision as
one about choice. Lifting the ban allows farmers to choose to plant, and
consumers to choose to eat or wear, GM crops.

But in the same way that the freedom to swing my fist ends where the tip
of your nose begins, the rights of those wanting to cultivate and
consume GM terminate at the point where this choice stops me making a
different one. And this takes us to the factual question of whether
anti-GM groups are right that cultivating these crops is the beginning
of the end of non-GM agriculture, or whether the proponents of GM are
correct to insist that segregation and coexistence are possible.

My reading of the evidence compiled in the two expert reviews
commissioned to review the ban - both of which recommended lifting it -
concede that contamination by GM crops of non-GM foods, organic and
conventional, is inevitable.

For conventional crops, even effective supply chain management will see
non-GM food contaminated by the “low level presence” of GM materials
that grain industry standards allow.

A similar level of contamination is also seen as inevitable in organic
produce but, unlike the grain industry, the organic one has zero
tolerance for GM. To be certified organic, produce must have no GM at
all. To solve this problem, the review panel suggests that current
definitions of organic be softened, as has been done in Europe. “In the
European Union, agriculture ministers have agreed to amend the
regulation of organic food to allow a non-zero threshold (.9 per cent)
for the unintentional presence of approved GM material in certified
organic products”.

The proffering of such solutions to the risks of contamination, rather
than a strict liability regime that would hold the GM farmer and seed
supplier responsible for all losses incurred as a consequence of
contamination, reflects the positive disposition of experts handpicked
by government to conduct the review had towards the technology from the
start. It’s politics, and that’s the way things go.

But when the NSW review expresses the view that contamination of non-GM
crops by GM is not “catastrophic,” and a member of the Victorian review
panel says in an interview that field contamination of
conventionally-grown canola with the GM is nothing to worry about
because “there is no danger or disadvantages to GM canola,” it’s hard to
trust that the recommendations made by the reviews have to manage the
introduction of the technology into Australia have the protection of
non-GM enthusiasts forefront in their minds.

The thing about food is just that: it’s food. We baste and sprinkle and
flamb&eacute; it, but in the end food must be honoured as a gift from
the planet essential t our survival. For some, the preciousness of food
leads to the adoption of the precautionary principle when it comes to
GM: a nay-saying born of a fear that the indeterminate risks of the
technology to human health and welfare could be so high, we need to turn
away.

But we don’t need to say, no. We just need to ensure governments stay
true to their word that in the brave new world of GM food, we’ll all
have a choice.