---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2008-04-27
tag: writings
title: At 50, the Material Girl is Not to be Pitied
---
Madonna turns 50 this year. Like every wheeze and fart in the
entertainer’s life, this one is attracting comment. From some, it sounds
like this. “50? She looks 30! If she really was a taboo-breaker, she
wouldn’t have smooth skin and pert breasts. She’d be strutting her stuff
on the cover of Vanity Fair with a wrinkled d&eacute;colletage and baggy
arms hanging out.”

Like most discussions about ageing in contemporary Australia, this one
is confused. On the one hand, baby-boomers can’t stop telling us that 60
is the new 50, that age-related discrimination is rife, and that no one
should have to give up what they do or love because others say they’re
too old. Stay at work! Keep enjoying sex! Arise and go windsailing!
Having only just arrived in middle age I can tell you that exhortations
to keep on keeping on are constant.

But don’t attempt to match your youthful activities with youthful looks,
or you will be condemned as unenlightened and vain. So what if employers
discriminate against older workers or that invisibility for women beyond
a certain age is inevitable? Resistance by Botox or surgery is wrong,
wrong, wrong. The upshot? We’re forbidden to act our age but required to
look it. Where’s the sense in that?

Which takes us back to the material girl. Yes, it would it have been
radical for the bare arms emerging from Madonna’s body suit to have been
dotted with hair-sprouting moles. Radical for cascading waves of
cellulite to have been visible above her thigh-high black boots.

But does anyone really think this would have made middle age “hot”? My
guess is that such an appearance would have started a whisper campaign
that would have brought Madonna’s long-running reign as a cultural icon
to a close. Poor Madonna, look at how old she looks. Poor Madonna, she’s
let herself go. Poor Madonna, can’t she see she’s not beautiful any
more, and so no longer entitled to the power beautiful women wield?

Pitying Madonna. It gives me shivers to think about it.

No wonder she has refused to age gracefully. No wonder she resists not
just in ways we approve (eating well, spending hours in the gym and at
dance rehearsals) but in ways we don’t (liquid and surgical lifts,
tucks, peels and slathers). Resists received opinion about right and
wrong, and the endless rules about how women should live their lives,
just as she has always done.

So why are we so quick to judge? Madonna is reticent about her fitness
and other age-retarding routines. She never promotes them as liberatory
or feminist in any sense.

I think it’s envy and a desperate sense that we can’t keep up. Madonna
at 50 looks better than most of us at 30, and this makes some of us feel
like failures. We could console ourselves with the fact she has a home
gym, a personal trainer, nannies and a travelling chef to support her
efforts, but instead we point the finger, and accuse her of letting us
down.

I don’t think she has and suspect that Nora Ephron would agree. Ephron,
of When Harry met Sally fame, had this to say about ageing in a recent
essay in American Vogue: “[Some people say] it’s great to be old. It’s
great to be wise and sage and mellow; it’s great to be at the point
where you understand just what matters in life. I can’t stand people who
say things like this.”