---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2008-08-22
tag: writings
title: Men, Abortion and the Sin of Moral Arrogance
---
Abortion is back in the news, with a bill now before the Victorian
parliament that, if it becomes law, will give women with problem
pregnancies of less than twenty-four weeks the right to decide for
themselves.

Whenever abortion is at issue, questions about the place of men in the
debate looms large and unspoken. What role do men play in political and
personal discussions about termination, and what role - morally speaking
- should they play?

The facts are simple. Men dominate the politics of abortion in the same
way they do all other issues. One figure puts the percentage of
anti-choice leaders who are men at 77%. This is in addition to the
significant influence male religious leaders like the Pope (through the
Vatican’s full membership of the United Nations) have on reproductive
health policy across the globe.

Even on the pro-choice side, where most leadership roles are held by
women, men have been critical to the success of campaigns that give
women the right to decide. MP Wayne Berry was the architect of the 2002
legislation in the ACT that treats abortion like any other medical
procedure. Henry Morgentaler was key to achieving a similarly
progressive law in Canada in 1988.

Problem pregnancies require decisions that touch on our most intimate
experiences and values concerning sex, fertility, love and
relationships. Here again, men feature large. Research shows that while
the vast majority of women faced with an unplanned pregnancy don’t want
counselling, they do want information from the biological father.
Indeed, he is the person they are most likely to consult as they
consider their choice. Does he want a child, now or ever? What role will
he play in raising it? What support might he provide if she decides to
go it alone? The presence of a man willing to engage in such
discussions, and the answers he gives, will critically affect the
woman’s decision.

So men do play a critical role in abortion politics and abortion
decisions. The question is, should they?

Men’s role in the decisions individual women make about problem
pregnancies is a simple fact of life to which no “ought” can or should
be applied.

But before you can determine the proper role of men in the political
debate, you must recognise the fact that-at the end of the day-a
decision about continuing or terminating a pregnancy is not open to
compromise. You can’t have half a baby or half an abortion. While women
in functioning, non-violent relationships do tend to consult the
biological father, ultimately one person’s view must prevail. The law
privileges the woman’s decision because the bodily experience of
pregnancy and birth invest her more heavily in the outcome.

It is also her call because, short of making a pregnant woman the
biological father’s slave, there would be no way to enforce his right to
decide other than giving him the power to wrestle her on to the surgical
table (if she wants to continue and he wants to terminate) or snapping a
collar on her and handing him the lead (if she wants to terminate and he
wants to continue).

Does men’s disconnect from the risk and experience of pregnancy and
birth disqualify them from political activism on the issue? Part of the
answer turns on the weight you give to experience.

Imagine a woman-led and dominated group that sought to deny men access
to safe and legal vasectomies on the grounds that the procedure is
dangerous, that men might come to regret their decision and that
vasectomies reduce the number of babies being born that infertile
couples would be more than happy to raise.

Do we think such a group is legitimate? That its views should hold sway
on the laws passed by parliament? Or do the demands of such an
organisation with regard to a procedure so intimately bound up with
men’s bodies and lives strike you as inappropriate, patronising and
domineeringly presumptive?

For me, it’s the latter. But I would feel differently if such a
female-dominated group came into being in a world where men were
struggling to achieve the legal right to choose safe vasectomy, and the
group’s aims were to help men gain control over an issue so critical to
their bodies and lives.

What matters, in other words, is not that men are involved but how they
are involved.

Men lack moral standing in the abortion debate-indeed are guilty of
moral arrogance-when they push for control over a procedure they’ll
never have to have because they can’t get pregnant.

But when men implicitly acknowledge their lesser standing by raising
their voices in support of laws that take away power from their own sex
in order to give it to women, they can feel confident they are doing the
right thing.