---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2008-09-10
title: Conscience Rights Must Be a Two-Way Street
---
Denying another’s freedom while exercising one’s own is hypocritical

Is it ever right to use one’s freedom to deny the exact same freedom to
others? What if those others are people you are sworn to serve and
protect?

Such questions may not be front of mind for our State MPs, but they
should be. Before the year is out, Victorian Parliamentarians will cast
a conscience vote on bills about physician-assisted suicide, abortion
and Assisted Reproductive Technologies (ARTs). Conscience clauses will
be contained in each of these bills.

Our understanding of the proper role of conscience in politics and
health remains remain murky. What is conscience, why are we pledged to
honour it, and what responsibilities do those who claim the right to
follow theirs have to others?

The right to act according to the dictates of our conscience is founded
in the value of autonomy. Autonomy means self-rule. An autonomous person
is one who is free to direct her life according to her own values.

It would be hard to overestimate the role autonomy-and so
conscience-plays in the value systems of contemporary Australian
society. Our political and legal structures are grounded in the belief,
to paraphrase High Court Justice McHugh, that autonomous individuals are
entitled to make, and are consequently responsible for their own
choices. Our health system, in line with that of others in the western
world, has shifted in the last few decades from the paternalistic idea
that doctors know best, to the view that patients have a right to make
their own informed choices about their care.

All this suggests what is true: that most learned discussions of
conscience focus on the duties lawmakers and medicos have to protect the
autonomy of citizens and patients. This is for good reason. Both our
elected representatives and health care staff are professionals: trusted
and respected members of society with a duty of care to those they are
sworn to serve and heal.

Despite this, some professionals in Victoria seem primarily concerned
with their rights when it comes to conscience, not their obligations.
Some MPs, understandably pleased at the rare opportunity to shrug off
party discipline, see a conscience vote as a chance for them to register
their own value positions on the issues at hand. In the same way,
conscience clauses in bills on euthanasia, abortion and ARTs tend to
spell out the entitlements of medical professionals to refuse treatment
they deem morally objectionable, but are silent on their obligations to
ensure patients get timely, appropriate care.

We need to get the balance right. Yes, the entitlements of MPs and
medical professionals to follow the dictates of their consciences are
part of the autonomy story. But if mutual obligation means anything,
then political and medical professionals who assert their right to vote
or to refuse care on grounds of conscience must take their
responsibilities to foster the autonomy of those they are bound to
serve-we citizens and patients-just as seriously.

They can do this by recognizing that it is unconscionable for someone to
defend the right to follow his conscience, then deny that very same
right to someone else. Such moral hypocrisy is compounded when those
denying the autonomy of others are professionals, and those they are
denying are the citizens or patients they are sworn to serve.

For politicians, this means thinking twice about using a conscience vote
to pass a law that denies citizens the right to act on their consciences
when terminally ill, facing an unplanned pregnancy or seeking to
conceive using ARTs.

For medical professionals, it means ensuring that all conscience clauses
in legislation include an obligation to refer. That is, where the law
articulates the right of doctors, nurses and pharmacists to refuse
treatment on grounds of conscience, it must also spell out the
obligations of professionals to ensure the needs of their patients are
met elsewhere. Pro-life groups continue to resist such basic demands,
though medicos tend to be on board. A recent letter to all Victorian MPs
signed by a number of religious leaders spent paragraphs detailing the
extensive rights of health care workers to refuse treatment on grounds
of conscience, and just one sentence tartly rejecting the idea these
providers had any obligation to refer. In contrast, the ethical practice
guidelines of the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RANZCOG) instructs its members to
“offer or arrange a further opinion and/or ongoing care with another
suitable practitioner if…the therapy required is in conflict with [your]
personal belief/value system.”

With all rights come obligations, and the freedom to follow one’s
conscience is no exception. As members of our community, politicians and
health care workers are as entitled as the rest of us to live their
lives according to their values.

But because they are professionals, these rights come with significant
responsibilities, responsibilities that come down to a requirement that
those who act from conscience live by the golden rule.

Do unto others as you would have them do to you.