---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2008-08-31
tag: writings
title: Heavy Cross to Bear for Gay Donors
---
Political activism is often a thankless task. It’s worse when the cause
is not just controversial, but shrouded in stigma and shame. Yes, a lot
of hard work goes into raising cash for breast cancer research or to
send disabled athletes to Beijing, but at least it’s easy to ask your
colleagues and friends to donate, and to get VIPs to sign on as patrons
to the cause.

Michael Cain is a 26 year-old gay man living in Tasmania who has stuck
his head above the parapet to make a stand on an issue of equity and
justice. But the battle Cain’s picked is one that not only opens him to
scorn and aggression because it reveals his sexual orientation, but of
accusations that he is putting his own interests ahead of the public
good.

Nothing could be further from the truth.

In 2005, the Australian Red Cross Blood Service refused Michael Cain’s
offer to donate blood because he has sex with men. Cain thinks the
grounds for this refusal amount to unjust discrimination, and he has
taken his case to the Tasmanian Anti-Discrimination Tribunal. The
question he wants the Red Cross to answer is simple. Why, given that he
practises safe sex, won’t they let him donate, when the Red Cross leaves
the welcome light on for donors who are sexually promiscuous and never
come within coo-ee of a condom, as long as they are straight.

It doesn’t make sense. Australia is widely acknowledged as having one of
the most intelligent and effective public health strategies to combat
the spread of the virus in the world. At the core of our policies is a
consistent and clear message about safe sex.

The risk of transmission of HIV/AIDS through the blood supply is
negligible, thanks to tests able to determine whether the virus is
present. To guard against the teeny, tiny risk that human error could
see infected blood mistakenly released into the blood supply, the Red
Cross tries to stop donors at risk of HIV/AIDS from holding out their
arm in the first place.

Well and good, but the question is: who is at risk of catching HIV/AIDS?

What public health experts have been telling us since the 1980s is that
those who have unsafe sex are at risk. What Cain wants the Red Cross to
do is screen out only those donors who practice unsafe sex, regardless
of the gender of their sexual partners.

In a happy coincidence, screening policies based on the riskiness of
sexual activity are both discrimination-free and effective. When Italy
switched from a screening policy based on the gender of the sexual
partner to one focused on risky behaviours, their transmission rates of
HIV through blood donation fell.

Using figures provided by one of the Red Cross’s own witnesses, Cain’s
legal team have shown that an Australian donor policy based on safety of
sexual activity would see an HIV positive donation from a gay man slip
through donor screening and clinical testing once every 5769 years. In
other words, never.

Discrimination on the basis of characteristics over which we have no
control, and which do not impact on our capacity to do the job, is
always wrong. The law does not, and should not, allow it.

The fact that when it comes to blood donation, doing the right thing may
make the blood supply safer, and more safe blood available, means change
can’t come soon enough.