---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2008-12-28
tags: ~
title: "Womenâ\x80\x99s Forum Australia is â\x80\x9CFaking itâ\x80\x9D"
---
Tune out or wise up. Late December and January is the season for
think-tanks and institutes. The time where the lack of action on the
government and university fronts leaves a hole in the news agenda that
third-party mouthpieces for political, industrial or religious interests
are more than happy to fill.

Not sure what I mean? You will by summer’s end. Stay tuned for feminist
analysis by Women’s Forum Australia (WFA), a group of women whose former
and current directors have employment histories that include advising
former Senator Harradine, leading pro-life agencies agencies and running
educational institutions linked to Opus Dei. Thrill to reasoned and
evidence-based analysis of current government policy by the Institute of
Public Affairs (IPA), an industry-funded neo-liberal outfit with close
links to the Liberal party.

We need to be clear. The problem is not with the nature of the views
held by such individuals and institutions, nor their relentless
promotion of them in the media. Everyone has an opinion, and the right
to have it heard. The problem is the selective disclosure by influence
peddlers of the full story of who they are, the basis of their beliefs
and who foots the bill for their ideas to be heard.

If WFA wants the government and private sector to adopt policies on
women no different to those advocated by the Pope and some evangelical
Christians, that’s their prerogative. But all those hearing their case
should also be told about the backgrounds of WFA’s directors and the
sum-total of the organisation’s agenda so they can decide for themselves
whether dispassionate feminist analysis of what will liberate women, or
blind obedience to faith, is the source of their views.

To offer a misleading organisational name, some selective biographies
and minimal facts about donors denies us the information necessary to
make an informed judgment about how much weight to give their views, or
whether to listen to us at all. It interferes with our autonomy-our
capacity to choose for ourselves.

The influence peddlers know this. They understand that while a headline
about conservative religious chicks opposing abortion will draw yawns,
one that reads “feminists oppose abortion” will turn heads. They know
that omitting information that could lead us to suspect the real reasons
why they believe as they do makes us bunnies, but they don’t care. They
know what’s best for us, and that is hearing what they have to say. If
that means selecting certain credentials while omitting others, then so
be it. All for the greater good.

Third party endorsements and selective credentialing are techniques some
think tanks, many of which are just glorified PR firms, employ to
influence us. To get us to listen, and give more weight to what we hear,
than we otherwise would if we had the full story about who an ‘expert’
was, and where she was coming from.

What can we do? Luckily we’ve already got the necessary paradigms in
place. Both journalists and citizens know how important it is to shine
the light into dark corners and not to believe everything we read. We
just need to be more generous, rigorous and systemic in applying what we
know.

We must learn to be cynical not just about what experts say, but who
they say they are, and to integrate this cynicism into school curricula,
the fact-checking processes of newsrooms and the critical faculties of
readers.