---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2008-09-07
title: Conscience Votes Entail Responsibilities, Not just Rights
---
Lord help me, here comes another conscience vote. This time, it’s about
whether our Federal MPs think it’s OK to spend our taxes on the cost of
an abortion necessary to save a woman’s life, or to evacuate her uterus
of a fetus that is already dead, or affected by “gross” abnormalities.
In 2006, Parliamentarians were allowed to exercise their moral judgment
on the acceptability of therapeutic cloning techniques to explore cures
for diseases like Parkinson’ disease and help for those confined for
life to wheelchairs. RU486, and before this, the Northern Territory’s
euthanasia bill.

Conscience votes sound like a great idea. Some argue that they are
democracy at work, with legislators freed from party discipline and
factional pressure to form a view based on the evidence, and express it
through their vote.

The truth is more complex. Yes, conscience votes are a noble idea, but
unless parliamentarians understand both their rights and
responsibilities when they cast one, the results can be, well,
unconscionable.

Here’s how it’s meant to work. The right to follow the dictates of our
conscience comes from the value of autonomy. Autonomy means self-rule,
and an autonomous person is one who is free to live her life according
to her own values.

Autonomy matters to Australians. It is no exaggeration to say that in
western countries like ours, it is the value that reigns supreme. Woven
into the fabric of a political system that has individual liberty as its
central goal, it is also central to the common law view that a person is
legally responsible for her choices and so must be free to make them.\
Conscience votes protect the autonomy of MPs. They allow them to follow
the dictates of their conscience by letting them vote for something they
believe is right, and against what they think is wrong.

But not so fast.

MPs, like all professionals, don’t just have rights, they have
responsibilities. By fighting for an issue to be decided by conscience
vote, or just accepting the privilege of casting one, they acknowledge
how important it is for them to live as they believe.

In what way is it fair or just then, for them to a cast a vote that
deprives others of the same freedom they enjoy with their vote: the
freedom to follow their conscience? Yet, this is what many do. Indeed,
it is those who fight so hard for personal moral issues like abortion
and stem cell research to be decided by conscience vote, that go on to
cast their vote in such a way as to deny the importance of conscience in
the lives of others. They vote against legislation that would give women
the right to exercise their consciences on the abortion question, or
those with critical illness the freedom to decide their own fate.

Hypocrisy? Absolutely, and made all the worse by the fact that MPs are
the ones who are meant to be protecting the autonomy - and the rights of
conscience - of their constituents, not undermining it. The job
description in a liberal democratic country like ours is not to impose
their values on us, but to legislate in ways that uphold the priniciple
that we, not they, know what is right for us.

A few years ago mutual obligation was the moral concept of the month,
and if this isn’t a mutual obligation issue, I don’t know what is. Yes,
as members of our community, politicians have a right to live their
lives according to their values. But as our elected representatives,
they have responsibilities, too. Namely, to take the conscience rights
of those they are bound to serve as seriously as they do their own.