---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2008-11-09
tags: ~
title: "Climate Change: Itâ\x80\x99s about the economy, stupid"
---
Catastrophic climate change is the moral issue of our time. If we flub
it, it is our children who will be denied their most basic inheritance -
a habitable and sustaining planet.

The response of business groups and the federal opposition to the
Government’s release of treasury modelling showing the economic costs of
various emission reduction targets was tedious. The Australian Chamber
of Commerce and Industry demanded compensation while the opposition
leader called for the scheme’s implementation to be-wait for it-delayed.

To date the debate has presumed the existence of a conflict between the
demands of the economy, and those of our failing planet. Careful policy
prescriptions are deemed necessary to mitigate this clash. These beliefs
are summed up by Treasury’s principal finding that, “The world and
Australia can significantly reduce the risks of dangerous climate change
and maintain robust economic growth.”

This statement needs to be rephrased. It should read: “If Australia
wants a functioning economy at all, it must significantly reduce the
risk of dangerous climate change.” Another way to put this is that when
it comes to climate change, decision-makers need to understand-to
paraphrase Bill Clinton’s famous electoral slogan-that it’s about the
economy, stupid.

That the continued health of the economy depends on the health of the
planet sounds like the “duh” statement of the year, but in a world still
saturated by neo-liberal economic ideology, it remains highly contested.
The argument goes like this. The economy requires “inputs” from the
eco-system. It uses these to produce goods and services that are
returned as “outputs” to the ecosystem as waste. The overall size of the
ecosystem-the amount of water, land, air, minerals and other resources
available as inputs-is fixed, but our economic system is built on an
assumption of endless economic growth. The demand for growth has led to
rapacious global economic growth with which the planet can’t keep pace.

Herman Daly, former senior economist at the World Bank, did the maths
years ago and discovered it just didn’t add. He argues that catastrophic
climate change is just one manifestation of our tragic miscalculation.
Back then, few listened. Now, with polar bears clinging to ice floes and
neo-liberal icons like Alan Greenspan spouting mea culpas in US
congressional hearings, some are tuning in.

But we must attend to the whole of Daly’s message. Not just his
indisputable planetary sums, but the way he makes his case. Not in the
language of green purists, eager to wave their fingers at capitalist
excesses and tell us how much happier we’ll be when we eat slow food,
but in the language economists and decision-makers understand. The
language of money.

Daly says that a planet emptied of forests, stripped of biodiversity and
covered in waters that contain no fish cannot provide the raw materials
an economy needs to generate profits, or to function at all. “Our
economy is now reaching the point where is it outstripping Earth’s
ability to sustain it. Resources are running out and waste sinks are
becoming full. The remaining natural world can no longer support the
existing economy, much less one that continues to expand.”

His message is clear. That the economy isn’t just killing the planet.
It’s killing the economy.

If the language of the almighty dollar is the only one business and
conservative political leaders understand, we must use it to argue for
an immediate and vigorous response to climate change.

Because time is running out.