---
assets: ~
published: 2008-10-19
tags: ~
title: Grace A Measure of Our Moral Fibre
---
“That was very gracious,” a friend of mine whispered at the conclusion
of a speech I gave recently. We were at a function that my
organization-which had done a lot of heavy lifting to achieve a shared
goal-had arranged to thank other individuals and groups who contributed
to a successful outcome.

Earlier that week, I had made a similarly approving comment about a
politician I had watched closely during a law reform debate. In his role
as speaker, he oversaw the debate about a measure to which he was
opposed. However, when it became clear that his side had lost, and the
bill would become law, he made an extraordinarily gesture. He appointed
the two main supporters of the bill to count the final vote so they
could make history by signing the paper that verified the tally.

Graciousness is a funny old ideal. Like an elevator jammed between
floors, it seems caught somewhere between etiquette and etiquette. The
dictionary says the gracious are marked by kindness, courtesy, tact,
delicacy, charm and good taste. Emily Post’s Etiquette defines
graciousness as the ability to handle situations with aplomb,
flexibility and thoughtfulness towards others. Ethics has little to say
about graciousness. None of the references on my shelf mention it at
all.

I think they should. The guard of honour that players and officials from
both St Kilda and Hawthorn formed to mark the retirement of St Kilda
footballer Robert Harvey seems more than an act of good manners. To say
of John Howard’s concession speech on election night 2007 then it was
“courteous,” gives inadequate recognition to the moral fortitude
required-in the face of what almost certainly was a whirlwind of
negative emotions-to have delivered it.

Graciousness can express generosity of spirit, and it this that gives
the quality its moral character. Philosopher Joseph Kupfer reminds us
that there are more ways to give then can be measured by money.
Graciousness is a reflection of emotional generosity, a giving to others
of more than the rules specify they are owed. The speaker of the house
was obligated to ensure that the debate and vote were conducted fairly:
no more or less. That he offered more to his political opponents is a
lot of what graciousness is about.

But it is not the whole story. Think of how we use the word: gracious in
defeat; grace under pressure. What makes an act gracious is not only its
above-and-beyond quality, but its delivery at a time of high emotion. At
a time when behaving badly could be forgiven, and doing only what is
required seems plenty to ask.

Finally, graciousness is a mark of respect: an acknowledgment of the
fair way one’s adversaries played the game, and for the rules and
institutions that governed the conflict. Think back to the concession
speech Al Gore made when the US Supreme Court ruled-incorrectly as it
turned out-that he had lost the 2000 election for president. “Let there
be no doubt,” he said, that “while I strongly disagree with the court’s
decision, I accept it…and for the sake of our unity as a people and the
strength of our democracy, I offer my concession.” Gore’s graciousness
was designed to calm the emotions of his supporters and to encourage
them to respect the result, even if they disagreed with it.

In this way does the gracious act impel us to remember matters much
larger than ourselves and the partisan preferences and emotions that may
rule our heart at any one time.