---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2008-06-22
tags: ~
title: Hating Gays is a Choice, Not a Biblical Dictate
---
Their strength is waning, but there is still a depressingly large number
of powerful men in the west, spread across a range of denominations,
spewing raw hate and naked prejudice at gay people. All in the name of
Christ.

We are talking about the sort of hate that gives rise to claim that
homosexual “inclinations” are an “intrinsic moral evil” that, if acted
upon, preclude gays from taking communion, occupying any official role
in the church and, ultimately, entering the Kingdom of God. The sort of
prejudice that led the Australian Anglican Archbishop to forbid any
parish in his archdiocese to welcome the openly gay American Bishop Gene
Robinson, and to declare that if Robinson was invited to a crucial
meeting of the world’s Anglican bishops in Lambeth, then the Australian
Archbishop would not be attending.

I am sorry, but someone seems to have had a fundamental misunderstanding
of the core insights of the Gospels, and it isn’t me. It was precisely
this sort of attack on social outcasts of Jesus’s time by the powerful
men of the day-the Temple Priests-that inspired Jesus’s mission and the
birth of Christianity. Precisely this sort of exclusion of vulnerable
and minority groups from society that saw Jesus enter the Temple to
challenge the Priests’ authority to decide who was cast out, and who
included in the circle of God’s concern.

There’s a joke about a pamphlet entitled, “What Jesus said about
Homosexuality.” When you open it, the pages are blank. As far as I can
tell, even the lunar religious right in America admits that Jesus never
said anything about homosexuality.

But even if the Bible did advise us to shun homosexuals or stone them
(as it suggests for adulterers), we don’t have to listen. After all, we
ignore its command to wed our virginal daughters to their rapists, and
refuse its permission to purchases the children of foreigners to serve
us as slaves.

The point is that even those who claim absolute obedience to scripture
are selective in the scripture they obey. They know as well as anyone
that there is much in the Bible that is irrelevant, outdated or just
plain barbaric.

And spare me the Bible-made-me-do-it crap. It didn’t work for the Nazis
at Nuremberg and it won’t work here. Acting pursuant to orders by
superiors of any sort doesn’t relieve an individual of responsibility if
a moral choice is possible.

Powerful Christian leaders have a choice. They don’t have to vilify and
discriminate against gay people, they choose to, and for this they can -
and should - be condemned.

What sort of leader makes this sort of choice? Neither the word
“Christian” or “ethical” spring to mind.

Perhaps one day both our spiritual and political leaders will get it
through their heads that taking potshots at people because of who they
are, not what they do, is stupid, wrong and not very nice. That everyone
deserves respect and a fair go no matter the colour of their skin, their
marital status, if and how they worship or who they love. That
individuals have a moral right to be judged on nothing more nor less
than what Martin Luther King Jr. called, “the content of their
character.”

And if the powerful men who yearn for the good old days when they could
stimatise and exclude whoever they liked while calling themselves holy
refuse to change their prejudicial ways, they should have the courage to
source this decision in their own dark heart, not an ancient book.