---
assets: ~
published: 2008-08-17
tags: ~
title: Ethical Carnivores Care for Animals Too
---
Have you heard about Lucy? The intensively-farmed sow with the
intelligence of a three year old who, in a series of Australian radio
ads, tells of a life so miserable that she wishes she could “close [her]
eyes and not wake up.”

Many would see the Lucy ads as a call for more Australians to become
vegetarian or vegan. This would not be a bad thing. Vegetarians walk the
walk. Whether frowning at menus short of meat-free options or
unapologetically arriving at cocktail parties in tennis shoes, they put
their morals where there mouths are and by so doing implicitly challenge
the rest of us to do the same. “I care about the suffering of animals,
and so I don’t eat meat or wear leather,” the vegetarian wordlessly
proclaims. “What about you?”

Personally, I’ve been on both sides of the meat-eating divide. A
vegetarian during my late teens and twenties on ethical grounds, I began
eating meat again when, pregnant for the first time, my dreams became
crowded with steak and hamburgers and my midwife diagnosed me with low
levels of iron. Another pregnancy and more than a decade later, I have
never looked back.

But while I continue to eat and enjoy meat, I rarely feel guilty. This
is because, for the most part, I am an ethical carnivore.

Most people don’t know it, but the central claim in Professor Peter
Singer’s revolutionary book Animal Liberation is that because animals
suffer, they are owed moral consideration. The sort of moral
consideration that requires we humans to eliminate any unnecessary
suffering, and reduce as much as possible the suffering justified by the
greater good: like that caused by scientific experiments which will
yield important results that can not be obtained in any other way.

This means that while vegetarianism is a good way of meeting our moral
obligations to animals, it is not the only one. Another is to commit
ourselves to only consuming animal products that have been farmed in
ethical ways: in way that mean that the animal does not suffer during
its life or, as far as is possible, in the slaughtering process.

Does this mean ethical carnivores eat less meat? Almost certainly yes,
as most restaurants serve factory-farmed products, so most meat-eating
must be done at home. But it also means that when we take the time and
pay the cash for free-range pork, chicken and eggs, we can consume it
guilt-free.

The Lucy ad is the latest in a long-line of attempts by animal
liberationists to inform us of the intense, unnecessary and unjustified
suffering of intensively farmed animals. Animals that may spend their
entire lives in darkness and in cramped boxes that deny them the freedom
to stretch, turn, or even stand, little less perform any of their normal
behavioral repertoire like scratching or nursing young. Animals whose
suffering should and does move us.

Ethical carnivores accept that the indifference of western consumers to
the suffering of animals is a consequence of our removal from the
gruesome and inhumane conditions in which most live and die. We accept
that it is our obligation to look at the reality of the lives of the
animals whose flesh and products we consume, and accept responsibility
for it.

But we believe that turning vegetarian or vegan is not the only way to
do this. Another is to make sure that the life of the animal we consume
have been managed with care.