---
assets: ~
published: 2008-02-17
tags: ~
title: Shameful Apology Proves Sorry Shame
---
Talk about giving with one hand and taking with the other! There, in
Parliament House, with members of the Stolen Generations looking on and
thousands more bearing witness via video link on the adjacent lawns. One
man, representing the nation, validating the painful experiences of
Aboriginal Australians and by so doing, reminding us of what we as
Australians have the potential to be. The other - his literal shadow -
excusing, justifying, insisting on his version of the truth and in so
doing, painfully reminding us why progress on race relations in this
country have been stalled for so long.

The trick of oppression is to dehumanise the victim. When a dehumanised
group is made “other,” using, abusing or even killing its members
doesn’t seem so wrong. The Nazis described Jews as rats and, when
discussing the numbers on trains heading for Auschwitz, as rags. Even
today, Blacks still suffer the occasional insult - commonplace in years
gone by - of being likened to animals.

Dehumanisation, argues Pumla Gobodo-Madikizela, a former member of South
Africa’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission, is one of the main causes
of the trauma suffered by the oppressed.

She illustrates this claim with the story of a black South African man
whose wife was killed by the Pan Africanist Congress while they sat
side-by-side in church. “My wife was wearing a long blue coat,” the man
sobbed when finally coming face to face with the killers during South
Africa’s truth and reconciliation process. “Please tell me, do you
remember shooting my wife?”

The reality, of course, was that in a church of one thousand people,
there was little chance that the killers remembered any one of their
victims. But for this man, for all victims, it was precisely the
invisibility and interchangeability of their loved one in the eyes of
the perpetrator that hurt so much. Forgiving, and the healing that can
come after, requires the wrong-doers - or those representing them - to
allow their victim a face.

How is this done? Firstly, victims must be allowed to tell their
stories. This allows the trauma to be integrated into the victim’s life
narrative and prevents her blaming herself or imagining she made the
whole thing up. But listening is not enough. The victim must truly be
heard and trusted. I hear you, I believe you, I acknowledge your pain, I
am so sorry what was done by me, or in my name. Each of these steps,
taken when wrong-doers or those who represent them listen to their
victims and reply only with “I’m sorry” give victims back their
humanity, replacing trauma and the cross-generational trail of substance
abuse and social disfunction that flows in its wake with the forgiveness
that is the first step to healing.

It was this that the Prime Minister stood on Wednesday on the floor of
the House to offer Aboriginal Australians: recognition of their full
humanity. And it was this humanity that his shadow - representing an
opposition that still finds it too much skin off their nose to simply
shut up and listen and still insists that their conceptualisation of the
causes of other people’s pain merits centre stage - challenged once
more.

It is to the credit of Indigenous Australians that they refused to let
the Opposition’s emotional tighfistedness and smallness of spirit
diminish or distract from their day. But morally speaking, what Nelson
said and did, was a shame.

A sorry, sorry shame.