---
assets: ~
published: 2008-10-26
tags: ~
title: Organ Donation Can Pose a Conflict of Interest
---
For millennia, religious authorities have defined death as the stilling
of the heart and the absence of breath. But all that changed in the
1960s when organ transplants became medically feasible. In the wake of a
Japanese surgeon being charged for a double murder for a failed attempt
to transplant a heart, the medical profession put its foot down. It
wasn’t long before dead patients were redefined from those without
beating hearts to those who might-or might not-have cardio-respiratory
function, but whose brain stems had definitely gone to God.

Brain death is the moment beyond which a patient’s brain stem-her body’s
supreme regulator-irrevocably ceases to function. When professional
guidelines are rigorously adhered to, it can be diagnosed with a high
degree of accuracy, and its predictive powers are second to none. A
correct diagnosis of brain death means a patient has virtually no chance
of meaningful recovery.

But just because brain death is a useful indicator of patient prognosis
doesn’t mean it’s problem-free. The dividing line between life and death
matters. Death is a prerequisite for relatives to grieve, wills to be
read and organs procured. But the switch to brain stem death has posed
problems for clinicians and the families of critically ill patients.
These problems include a mismatch between the way death is defined and
palpable clinical realities (brain-dead women can gestate and give birth
to healthy babies, a feat not normally associated with the dead) and
between clinical practice and community attitudes.

Australian organ donation rates have remained stubbornly low despite
interventions designed to lift them. Despite surveys showing high rates
of public support for donation, there may be latent public discomfort
with the way patients are declared dead at the bedside and, despite
their warm pink skin, pre-treated as organ donors (drugs may be given
and tubes inserted while the heart is still beating). In one survey 20%
of families doubted whether their brain-dead relative was really dead
while another found that among the reasons people give for not signing
donor cards is the fear that doctors “might do something to me before
I’m really dead” or might “hasten my death.”

Medicos wax indignant at the expression of such fears feeling, perhaps
correctly, that their professionalism is being questioned but the truth
is that we ignore such conflict-of-interest concerns at our peril. There
is a conflict of interest between the establishment of a valid and
consistent definition of death and the demands of organ donation
programs: a conflict underlined by the involvement of doctors who work
in both intensive care and organ transplantation in the establishment of
guidelines dictating when death can be pronounced and organ procurement
commenced.

What is the answer?

We need to accept that patients may still be alive yet eligible to
donate organs, and to amend both clinical and legal definitions of death
to reflect this. The Federal Government must consult broadly before
developing rigorous, nationally consistent guidelines for declaring
death and eligibility for organ donation.

If we really want to tackle Australia’s low rate of organ donation,
medicos must stop replying to conflict of interest concerns with
defensiveness and support a full and open exploration of the issue.
Dissenting doctors and the public-all of us potential donors and
recipients-deserve our concerns to be taken seriously and addressed.

Brain death is a convenient fiction about which medical ethicists,
clinicians and community members have long expressed concern. We need to
fix the problem, not shoot the messenger.