---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2009-01-18
title: Whats Wrong with Adults Paying for Sex
---
This summer, Norway has quietly joined Sweden in outlawing paid sex. Men
who have sex with prostitutes working in brothels or on the street face
hefty fines or six months in gaol, while the women involved will be
offered assistance to exit the industry. “We want to send a clear
message to men that buying sex is unacceptable,” said the Norwegian
Justice Minister, echoing the sentiments of Swedish detective Kajsa
Wahlberg. “We don’t have a problem with prostitutes. We have a problem
with men who buy sex.”

Sweden’s first attempts to move away from a liberal, harm-minimisation
approach to prostitution began in 1997. Then, everyone laughed. No one
is laughing now, with a number of EU countries having either adopted
elements of the recriminalisation approach, or considering doing so in
the future. Australia could be next. The “women-as-victim” paradigm on
which recriminalisation is based is the brain-child of radical English
feminist Sheila Jeffreys, now based in Melbourne, and is supported by
conservative Christian groups like Women’s Forum Australia and the
Australian Christian Lobby.

Prostitution and substance-abuse pose significant policy dilemmas for
liberal democratic societies. This is because the foundational claim of
such political cultures-that competent, rational citizens are entitled
to make their own decisions, even if we think they are wrong-clash with
the widely shared view that some choices are not just mistaken, but
harmful for those involved and for society at large. Recriminalisation
capitalises on this conundrum in two ways.

Firstly, by conflating things that should remain separate to make the
problem seem larger, and the harms greater, than they are. Making paid,
consensual sex in a legal brothel the same as sex slavery; the one-time
use by a student of marijuana as no different to heroin addiction.
Secondly, by manipulating our reflexive sympathy for the vulnerable into
agreement that for some people, choice is a hazard, and so need not be
defended. Instead, we just need to say, “no.”

I’m not convinced. Prohibitionist rhetoric and policy has a lousy track
record, no matter how desperately radical feminists and conservative
Christians join forces to convince us otherwise. Sure, it may work for
some people in some cases, but the resistant rump are just forced
underground, attracting both shame and stigma as they descend. Like it
or not, substance use and paid sex will always be with us. Criminalising
them just makes it harder for harm minimisation policies aimed at
preventing the transmission of HIV/AIDS and minimising the risk of
violence to succeed.

Just as worrying is the harm caused to those that the new approach
reinscribes as victims. The language is telling. Liberals speak of sex
workers and drug users. Paternalists describe prostituted women and
addicts-adults incapable of making good choices and so requiring legal
rescue from their consequences.

Women, in particular should beware. Professor Jeffreys says the
subjugation of the prostituted woman is a microcosm of all women’s
domination by men. She faults straight sex, which she sees as the means
by which men maintain power over women and perpetuate the patriarchy,
which explains her belief that real feminists must be lesbians. What
social re-jigs might be required to resist such subjugation is anyone’s
guess, though I’m sure it will be for our own good.

And here lies the problem. Exploited people - women, drug-users - may
deserve our pity, but they don’t deserve our trust. We need to empower
people to make better choices, not deny them any chance to control their
lives.