---
assets: ~
published: 2009-08-30
tags: ~
title: Circumcision - Who Decides?
---
Circumcision used to be the done thing. Now, only around 10 per cent of
Australians circumcise their male infants. But in Tasmania, they are
trying to find a way to stop them. A recently released Tasmanian Law
Reform Institute issues paper makes no bones about its desire to use the
criminal law to prosecute some hapless Jewish, Muslim or Aboriginal
parents for circumcising their boys.

Currently, the law won’t do it. As the paper admits, male circumcision
does not constitute unlawful wounding, ill treatment or child abuse.
This means that when parents make substantially free and informed
decisions to circumcise their infant sons, their actions are lawful.

But we need to keep an eye on this one. Changes to Tasmania’s laws could
spark similar moves across the country, and the views of the man who
initiated the law reform push-Tasmania’s children’s commissioner Paul
Mason-seems dangerously unbalanced. “Laws protect girls from [having
their clitoris or entire labia excised],” he recently told a newspaper,
but parents are free to “go around willy-nilly chopping up bits of their
sons”.

Before I go further, I should say that I come from a Jewish background
though I did not circumcise either of my sons. It was a bugger of a
decision and I prayed for girls in hope of avoiding it. When this
failed, I considered the choice carefully, canvassing the medical,
ethical, social and cultural/religious issues in turn.

As I see it, the health case for and against circumcision cancel each
other out (you can argue the toss, but essentially the evidence can be
summed up as “there are no medical reasons for or against
circumcision”). Social reasons for circumcising, like it’s “cleaner” or
“I want my son to look like Dad,” are trivial and do not stand up well
to scrutiny.

This leaves cultural/religious reasons that, in my case, were not
compelling. I’m not a believer, nor a member of a community that would
cut me off-and reject my sons-if I did not circumcise. I did wonder
whether my sons might want to be members of such a community, but
figured that by the time they were old enough to make that decision,
they could decide for themselves about circumcision.

In general, when parents can defer a meaningful decision about their
child to a time when the child can have input, or preferably make it
himself, they should. I was able to do this with circumcision.

But for some parents, this would not be possible. What if there is a
family history of urinary tract infections-a risk reduced by
circumcision in infancy? What if the parents are part of a community
that demands circumcision and they believe that their son’s acceptance
into this community is key to their current happiness and identity
formation? Isn’t the freedom to decide what is in our own and our
child’s best interest what a liberal, democratic society is all about?

This does not mean that anything goes. Obviously if circumcision was
demonstrably injurious to a child’s physical and mental health-as is
female genital cutting-it must be outlawed, no matter what minority
groups say. But like Cinderella’s step sister straining at that glass
slipper, anti-circumcision advocates can’t make the evidence about male
circumcision fit. No matter how you look at it, male circumcision isn’t
mutilation or child abuse.

There is no shortage of those who know what is best for our kids.
Thankfully, Australian law puts parents in charge. Let’s make sure we
keep it that way.