---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2009-06-07
tags: ~
title: Where Rights, Medicine and Law Collide
---
Last year an Australian woman undertook a medical procedure. This week
she and her boyfriend will face court because of it, charged with a
crime. If found guilty, the 19-year-old and her 21-year-old boyfriend
could get 10 years’ jail.

The names of the couple don’t matter. They could be any one of us. The
prosecution is taking place in Australia for the crime of abortion.

That in 2009 an Australian citizen can be found guilty of undertaking a
medical procedure and face jail is a scandal. A scandal that neither
politicians in Queensland (where this week’s prosecution will take
place) or in NSW (where a doctor was convicted of the crime of unlawful
abortion in 2006) intend to do anything about. Not unless they are
forced to take action by a resolute medical profession and ordinary folk
like you and me.

Abortion is in the Crimes Act in both NSW and Queensland. The statutes
are roughly similar, making it a crime for a woman to seek an abortion
and for anyone else to help her procure one.

This is not the case elsewhere. In 2002 the ACT removed abortion from
the Crimes Act and last year Victoria did the same. Politicians in NSW
and Queensland have been ignoring advice that they clarify, modernise
and liberalise abortion law for years. This includes recommendations
made in a report by the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General and in a
Queensland report on women and the criminal code.

Some doctors have had enough. Respected Cairns gynaecologist Dr Caroline
de Costa and her colleagues are now refusing to provide safe medical
abortions to women for fear they, or their patients, will wind up in
jail. If other providers in Queensland, and across the border in NSW,
are smart, they will follow suit. Because, as this week’s court case
proves, whispered assurances by craven politicians that doctors have
nothing to fear from antiquated, conservative and unclear laws are
mistaken.

For their own peace of mind and the long-term best interest of their
patients, health-care workers must insist that politicians reform the
law.

Determined and resolute doctors can compel reluctant politicians to act.
They have done it before. In 1998 in Western Australia abortion was in
the criminal code and two doctors were charged. Political leaders
insisted - in the face of obvious evidence to the contrary - that the
law didn’t need reform. But when providers at Perth’s main hospital
downed tools, refusing to provide terminations in all but emergency
situations, and two women wound up in casualty from botched attempts to
self-abort less than 48 hours later, the government was forced to act.

Doctors can’t be expected to agitate on their own. Striking doctors in
Western Australia had a multitude standing behind them. Supporters
included courageous Labor, Liberal and minor party politicians, the AMA,
family planning and legal advocacy organisations, progressive Christian
groups, a well-organised and dedicated group of grassroots activists and
the people of Western Australia, 82 per cent of whom told pollsters they
thought abortion should be legal.

Such coalitions are only starting to form in NSW and Queensland. Only
time will tell if they will be successful.

If not, the other chance for law reform will be if the NSW Government
looks to history and makes a magnanimous gesture. If the Premier
referred the issue to the NSW Law Reform Commission, then acted on its
recommendations before the next election, women choosing abortion in NSW
might finally lose the “criminal” tag.