---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2009-07-05
title: Gene Patents Violate Civil Liberties
---
There’s a question that’s been around for about 30 years: whether
private, for-profit companies should be allowed to gain exclusive
control over knowledge about our genes.

Should private interests profit from their understanding of the human
genetic code or from tests or cures they may - or may not - be willing
or are able to derive from this knowledge? Is such control, encouraged
by research funding arrangements and facilitated by patent law, the best
way to serve the public good and public health?

The American Civil Liberties Union says “no”. Last month the union
launched a court action on behalf of scientific and women’s health
groups and individual women at increased risk of hereditary cancers. The
action challenges the patents on two genes held by a company called
Myriad. The genes are linked to hereditary breast and ovarian cancer and
the patent grants Myriad exclusive rights to control and profit from the
testing of women with a family history of such cancer, to conduct
further research on the gene and to control and profit from therapies
that might result from the research.

If the union wins, it’s not just the patent on Myriad’s genes that may
be rendered invalid but the tens of thousands of other patents on human
genes, too.

Luigi Palombi, a patent lawyer recently interviewed on the ABC’s
Background Briefing, thinks this is fair enough. According to Palombi,
private companies should never have been allowed to patent genes in the
first place. Not only are such patents unfair (Myriad only identified
fragments, but was granted control of the entire gene), but they violate
the legal prohibition on patenting abstract ideas or the laws and
products of nature. Patents are ineffective and inefficient, reducing
the competition and co-operative endeavour needed to understand and
exploit genes for human health and limiting women’s options regarding
their medical care. Palombi says that instead of complaining about the
potential loss of their genomic patents, the companies that currently
hold patents should be grateful. They always knew they were stretching
the limits of patent law, and the fact that they’ve been getting away
with it for 20 years means “they’ve received an advantage that, frankly,
they were not entitled to receive”.

In 2004, the Australian Law Reform Commission completed an 18-month
inquiry into intellectual property rights over genetic materials and
related technologies, though its recommendations have yet to be
implemented. The Senate community affairs committee just finished taking
submissions on the wisdom of granting patents in Australia over genes
and their products, with public hearings to commence shortly.

The main problem for those hoping to wrest control of the human genome
from the profit-seekers is to counter the self-interested claim by
biotechs and big pharmaceutical companies that they are the only ones
who can do the research and development needed to unearth the secrets of
the genome. Such companies argue that in exchange for their contribution
to human health, we owe them proprietary control and profits.

This is unadulterated rubbish. Patenting is just one component of a
framework for facilitating scientific and medical innovation.

The union case is about rejecting patents as neither the best nor the
right way to promote and protect genetic knowledge and innovation. It is
not too late to unscramble the egg.