---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2009-04-05
tag: writings
title: Private School, Public Shame
---
Australia has come a long way-some might say the wrong way-when the
Education Minister dismisses debates about equity in school funding as a
diversion from what she laughably calls Federal Labor’s broad and deep
reform agenda.

The Labor government’s education agenda is neither broad nor deep, nor a
reform agenda by any definition of that word. Instead, Labor’s education
policy approach is wasteful, inequitable and more of the same. Why?
Because in what was arguably the most Faustian deal brokered by the
Kevin ’07 team in the lead-up to the last Federal election, Labor
promised parents who aspire to send their kids to private school, or
actually do, a perpetuation of the unfair funding formula introduced by
John Howard.

According to Associate Professor Jim McMorrow, this formula helps fund
every independent school student in the country to the tune of $13.500.
This is one and one half the amount dedicated to educating kids in the
public system. It is a formula that since 1996 has seen a 37% increase
in resources for kids who attend Catholic schools, a 29% increase for
those at independent schools, but a mere 24% boost for the majority of
kids, who attend public school. The funding flows from tax-payers to
private school coffers with few strings or transparency measures
attached and will do - according to the Education Minister - until at
least 2012.

Gillard’s claim that complaints about such rampant inequity are a
diversion from the main game of goose-stepping to the Government’s
agenda is not just wrong, it’s offensive. Equity in school funding is no
diversion, it’s the main moral game. What kind of parents and educators
would accept such a Marie Antoinette style of funding? What kind of
human beings would say, “Thanks Julia. For our kids, crumbs from the
table are OK.”?

But while the government’s rhetoric and diversionary tactics are
contemptible, its motive are clear. John Howard’s funding formula was
designed to create more parents who send their kids to private school
but can only just barely afford to do so. Some such parents may
believe-wrongly as it turns out-that a steadily increasing flow of
taxpayer dollars to private school coffers keeps fees lower than they
otherwise would be. With just over half of NSW private school parents
telling researchers that they already make large or considerable
sacrifices to pay fees now, it’s little wonder the claws come out when
anyone questions the status quo.

Howard’s aim was to fund schools in a way that would provoke
middle-class flight from the public system and wedge the
then-Opposition. He succeeded on both counts. There are no longer enough
voters engaged with the public system or supportive of the values it
represents to make an equitable funding regime a politically profitable
policy for Labor. Thus has the foundation stone of any egalitarian and
socially mobile society-a compulsory, first-rate, free and secular
education for all-been transformed into a political problem for ALP
politicians, who strive to keep the issue off the agenda and pillory
those who debate it on any terms but their own.

This must not be a cause for despair, but hard-eyed realism. To
paraphrase Forrest Gump, public education allies are as public education
allies do. Politicians and parties that stand up for the values of
equity and inclusion and fight for the resources required to give all
Aussie kids a quality education deserve our praise. Those that don’t
must hear us roar, and believe us when we say we won’t go away.