---
assets: ~
published: 2009-01-04
tags: ~
title: 'Natural Earth Burials: Should our last decision be environmental?'
---
Ethical talk about the dead usually focuses on rights. The rights of the
dead to have their last wishes carried out, and their bodies treated
with respect.

But as the baby-boomers approach old age, this is set to change. Soon,
deaths will outnumber births in this country. When they do, we shall
come face-to-face with our least favourite topic-what to do with our
bodies when we die.

Current trends are unsustainable. City cemeteries are chockers, forcing
the 30 per cent of us still choosing burial to be interred out of town,
or to lease a space for thirt-odd years closer to home that may be on
top of an ossuary full of older bones. Those choosing cremation will
hardly fare better, with the scarcity of memorial sites and the price of
leasing them also on the rise.

Then there’s the environmental costs. Cremation costs us, and the earth,
less. A 2007 report by consulting firm GHB found that while cremation
emitted four times as much CO2 on the day as burial, factoring in the
cost of maintaining cemeteries saw cremation triumph as the superior
environmental option.

Not that either option is anything to write home to mother about. The
average car produces 4.5 tons of carbon every year, making the emissions
load of each burial the equivalent of 38 cars, and that of cremation
only slightly less.

Natural earth burials cost the same as cremation, but are far easier on
the earth. The untreated body is wrapped in shroud or unlined pine box
and buried with a microchip or magnet. Relatives wanting to return to
the site put its coordinates into a GPS device provided by those
managing the site.

The idea, to quote ABC journalist Ian Townshend, is to turn your body
into “food for [a] tree” in what will eventually become a forest of
souls: a natural memorial ground developed by the gradual re-vegetation
of suitable space. It’s an idea that’s time may have come. In the UK,
where natural burial has been an option for a decade, 35 per cent want
to approach perpetuity this way.

The founder of White Knight Funerals, one of the few operators offering
natural earth burials, puts the moral case for choosing them baldly.
“Both cremation and traditional burial are…environmentally
irresponsible. It is one thing to consume to support human life, but…to
treat our dead in such a way that they continue to consume post mortem
is absurd.”

In other words, we are selfish to choose traditional burial or cremation
when a better choice exists, and our families are morally irresponsible
to let us.

I like the idea of natural burials, but am not quite convinced. Yes,
large headstones may be over the top, but an unmarked grave seems
extreme in the other direction, denying the departed and those who
grieve for her the individualization that dignifies and recognises loss.
And what of the history and comfort provided by traditional cemeteries?
I spent many angst-ridden years walking through the one near my
university, gaining perspective through the reading of the trials of
others as revealed by their headstones (wives lost to childbirth,
children to disease, whole townships to famine). What will be lost from
our history if memorialisation of the dead becomes impermanent? Memorial
kiosks are the proposed solution, but what happens when it all-both
trees and kiosk-go up in smoke courtesy of a passing bushfire?

It’s something to think about for sure, but natural burial has some way
to go.