---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2009-05-17
tags: ~
title: Sex Test Engenders a Skewed Reality
---
The Mother’s Day press release was cloying. The innovation it heralds is
unnecessary at best and, at worst, a sexist menace.

The product is IntelliGender, a $95 urine test that claims to identify
the sex of a foetus from as early as eight weeks. It went on sale last
Sunday at some Australian chemists.

IntelliGender’s tag line is, “Pink or blue, we’ll tell you!” It’s here
the problems start. Already, experts have raised doubts about the test’s
capacity to reliably discern foetal sex. No reports on the science
behind it have appeared in the academic literature and even the company
admits that the 90 per cent accuracy achieved in clinical tests falls to
82 per cent in real-world conditions.

How much this matters has everything to do with the real-world uses to
which the test is put. If few buy it, and those that do see it as no
more than a bit of fun designed to get those nursery colour coordinates
right, then who cares? But the worry is that in Australia, where
abortion is a safe if not always lawful procedure, test results might
not be accurate, yet become the basis of a decision with legal, medical
and ethical ramifications. This is different to home pregnancy tests,
the results of which are always validated prior to an abortion being
undertaken or antenatal care commenced.

But the core ethical concerns raised by DIY sex-identification kits are
about more than informed decision-making. They take in the motives of
users and the consequences for all of us if skewed gender preferences
are given free reign.

Currently, the only way Australians can select their child’s gender is
to create embryos using IVF, then screen for sex prior to implantation.
In most Australian states, this technology can only be offered to
couples seeking to avoid the birth of a child with an inherited
gender-linked disease such as haemophilia. Where the law is silent,
medical research and ethics guidelines - which tend to frown on use of
the technology for non-medical reasons - reign. In the past, there was a
NSW clinic that offered embryo screening for medical reasons and to
those seeking to balance their family by having a child of a sex
different to their existing children but this service has now been
withdrawn.

The lack of outcry about such restrictions seems best explained by low
levels of desire to select gender for reasons other than avoiding
disease or family balancing.

The best predictor of couples who will try for a third child are those
with two children of the same sex, and surveys of Anglo and European
couples - Australian data is scarce - show low levels of interest in
using gender-selection technology. This is as it should be. Parents
should not have a general preference for one sex over the other
validated, nor be allowed to turn such preferences into a skewed gender
reality (most likely, a world in which more boys are born than girls).
Gender selection using IVF to avoid disease or balance genders in a
family doesn’t do this. Also, by compelling couples to turn up at
clinics to access the technology, it makes possible the sort of
monitoring that would reveal straight away if couples were choosing more
of one sex than the other.

Home-based testing kits for foetal sex undercut informed
decision-making, trivialise gender-based childbearing decisions and
render their consequences - should the use of the test followed by
abortion become widespread - difficult to monitor.

It’s hard to see reasons to have them on pharmacy shelves.