---
assets: ~
published: 2009-10-28
tags: ~
title: Can it Ever be Ethical to Let Women Die?
---
A disturbing trend is emerging in the writings of those opposed to legal
abortion. Since the passage of Victoria’s Law Reform Act last year, they
have been campaigning against the limits the new law imposes on the
rights of healthcare professionals to conscientiously object to
involvement in abortion.

From Liberal Senator Julian McGauran’s most recent contribution in
Quadrant, to previous pieces by Father Frank Brennan (chair of the
National Human Rights Consultation), Martin Laverty (CEO of Catholic
Health Australia) and Doctor’s in Conscience’s Eamonn Mathieson,
opponents of legal abortion argue that rights of medical professionals
and Catholic health institutions to refuse care to women seeking
abortions is absolute. Even where such denial could see a woman die,
they maintain that refusing to provide an abortion is the right, and
their right, to do.

There is much that is offensive, even shocking, about the absolutist
nature of such assertions. However important is religious freedom, it
does not trump other rights. However important medical professionals
are, their rights are no weightier than those held by others - certainly
not their patients to whom they owe a duty of care. In fact, even if
religious and conscience rights were trumping, there’s still arguments
about whose religion or conscience - the doctor’s or the woman’s -
should prevail when conflicts arise over abortion care.

Where the rights of women seeking abortions are taken seriously (and
these include their right to follow the dictates of their conscience, to
informed decision making about their health, to timely medical care and
to life), the absolutist approach seems inadequate at best. At worst, it
seems to disregard the pregnant woman’s basic humanity.

Perhaps this fact is why most of those arguing for a change to
Victoria’s conscience clause rarely mention women by name. They don’t
directly say, “we don’t care if women die, doctors conscience rights are
supreme”.

Rather they condemn the new law’s “coercion” of individual health
workers and healthcare organisations to act contrary to their
consciences by requiring “participation in abortion through … direct
assistance.” They declaim with high dugeon the “extraordinary attempt by
pro-abortion legislators” to threaten the livelihoods health
practitioners who “are unwilling to … perform an abortion,” but never
mention that the only compulsion to provide abortion in the Victorian
legislation is in an emergency where it is necessary to preserve a
woman’s life.

The conscience clause in Victoria’s new abortion law requires just two
things from doctor’s wanting to be excused from what the Victorian Law
Reform Commission described as the “general expectation that
practitioners will provide medical services”.

The first is that they don’t exercise this freedom at the cost of a
woman’s life. The second is that they ensure their refusal to provide
timely medical care doesn’t translate into her inability to get timely
medical care by providing an effective referral.

For those willing to mention women by name, this seems the least they
can do. After all, women have rights, too.