---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2009-10-25
title: Something Mad About Refugee Policies
---
Even if we eliminate people smugglers, the people needing smuggling
won’t disappear.

Kevin Rudd has an unnerving resemblance to Alfred E. Neuman, the
gormless cover boy of *Mad* magazine. Periodically offered for higher
office, Neuman’s election slogan is always the same. “You could do worse
… and always have.”

This week about 260 Sri Lankans, including 27 women and 31 children, are
docked in western Java. They were seeking asylum in Australia, and are
now refusing to leave their boat after being intercepted - at Rudd’s
request - by the Indonesian navy. These people, and another 75 fleeing
the brutal civil conflict in Sri Lanka who remain at sea in
international waters, would have featured large in the Prime Minister’s
discussion with his Indonesian counterpart in Jakarta last Tuesday.

I’ve written about boat people and stand by my view that community
anxiety about such asylum seekers (only 3 per cent of those who seek
refuge in Australia) is a proxy for the frustration many Australians
feel about the refusal of successive governments to develop a national
population policy.

But knowing why hysteria ensues each time a leaky vessel enters
Australian territorial waters doesn’t tell us how we should respond to
the men, women and children on board seeking our protection and whom
history suggests will overwhelmingly be found to be genuine refugees.

We all know what’s right. We know in the same way we know that if a
young, scared-looking woman pounded on our door in the middle of the
night seeking refuge from some unseen persecutor, that we must let her
in. Refusing to open the door - or, having seen her approach through the
blinds, unleashing the dog to drive her from the gate and into the arms
of our none-too-savoury neighbour - doesn’t absolve us of a duty to
help. It simply adds “weasel” to the charge sheet.

Yet, in policy terms, this is what federal Labor is doing. This year,
the Government has allocated $654 million to what it loftily describes
as a “comprehensive, whole-of-government” approach to “combat[ing]
people smugglers”. We need to stop kidding ourselves. Even if we
eliminate people smugglers, the people needing smuggling won’t
disappear. Just because people don’t suffer on our patch doesn’t mean
they aren’t suffering.

And anyone who thinks our Indonesian “friends” are not exploiting this
Government’s determination to do whatever it takes to deny less than 300
people on-shore processing of their asylum claims needs to consult the
dictionary definition of realpolitik.

The international convention on refugees was developed in response to
the outflow of Jews from Europe after World War II and in light of the
deaths of a third of the 937 men, women and children who embarked on
what a later Hollywood movie would call the Voyage of the Damned. Having
fled Nazi persecution in 1939, the SS St Louis was forced back to Europe
after being denied entry to Canada, the US and Cuba.

Australia signed the refugee convention in the 1950s but if we can’t
honour our obligations, we should have the decency to formally withdraw.
Better still, we could elect federal politicians with the will and
capacity to lead, rather than grovel to the lowest common denominator.
The Prime Minister still has the moral authority - not to mention the
electoral margin - to open a new policy and rhetorical chapter on asylum
seekers and population issues more generally.

Should he fail to do so, Australia’s policies on refugees will remain
just as Alfred E. Neuman said: “Like steer horns. A point here, a point
there and a lot of bull in between.”