---
assets: ~
published: 2009-03-01
tags: ~
title: Ethics in a Time of Media
---
We expect a lot of our media. Not more than we should, but a decent
amount, often without either acknowledging the importance of a free
press to democracy, or the structural factors that can get in the way of
well-meaning journalists doing the right thing.

In the hot seat this week has been media coverage of the Victorian
bushfires. Less then a week into the tragedy, some journalists were
accusing their colleagues of peddling “grief porn,” while others were
dirty on the quality of the saturation coverage, and the motivations
behind it. Public self-flagellation turned to high farce when Fairfax
columnist Ross Gittens laid blame for much journalistic excess at the
public’s door, which he claimed “enjoys” a “good natural disaster” and
relies on the media to give their feelings of sympathy, sorrow and grief
“a good workout.”

I come to both praise the media, and to bury it.

The media plays a critical role in disseminating information in a
crisis. Our media, in particular the ABC, did an excellent job of
keeping Victorians informed. Rolling coverage of the location of fires,
and threat warnings by the CFA, were essential for bush-dwellers needing
to decide whether to prepare, stay and defend or leave early. Indeed, a
community meeting at Kinglake, one of the communities devastated by the
blaze, agreed that, “99% of the coverage had been great.”

Does this mean that no reporters or news outlets ever stepped over the
line? Of course they did but everyone makes mistakes, and all
professions have their bottom-feeders. Perhaps sadly, journalism is no
different.

Now the burial. The most irksome aspect of the bush-fire coverage is the
public navel-gazing currently being undertaken by the media about the
way it has covered the disaster. There’s nothing wrong with the media
using the media to yak about itself. It’s an important and powerful
institution and the way it goes about its business is a matter of public
concern. Rather, what worries me about the public self-flagellation is
that it will not solve the problem. Indeed, over-rating the importance
of such full-frontal introspection might deter the deliberate and
concerted action needed to actually fix the problem.

So what should we be doing?

We need to accept that we can change. All we need is the will, and a
decision to convene a round-table, with media representatives, relevant
government departments, disaster relief organizations and trauma
experts, to develop guidelines for reporting on disasters and strategies
for getting the media to adhere to such rules in their day-to-day work.

There are precedents for such an approach. Several years ago, concerns
surfaced about the risks posed to vulnerable members of the community by
careless media reporting of suicide. In response, a number of considered
and practical guidelines were developed to assist media organisations to
understand the potential for harm, and how their reporting could avoid
it. Many Australian journalists are exposed to the guidelines during
their training or when they first hit the newsroom and, by and large,
media organs honour them in the observance rather than the breech.

Disasters have terrible, but similar contours. We need a code of conduct
for reporting on such happenings that is ethical, relevant and workable.
That attempts to balance the media’s obligations to inform people about
what goes on in their name and in their midst, against the risk of harm
that some sorts of reporting can cause to those at the epicenter of a
disaster, and those watching on.