---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2009-09-29
tag: writings
title: "We Must Say â\x80\x9CKnowâ\x80\x9D to Abstinence-Only Sex Ed â\x80\x9CChoices,
  Decisions, Outcomesâ\x80\x9D"
---
Your children have a right to sex education. This right is a component
of their sexual rights, themselves a subset of the human rights
guaranteed to them in international laws, human rights documents and
other consensus statements.

But don’t cry out for joy or fly off the handle with rage just yet.
Because whatever abstract entitlement our kids have to accurate,
relevant and age-appropriate information about sex, relationships and
reproduction in the classroom, most aren’t getting any. Education, that
is. They are getting plenty of sex, some of it unwanted, as well as
sexually transmitted infections, unwanted pregnancies and, if they are
same-sex attracted, a worrying dose of suicidal thoughts.

Yet, despite such incontrovertible evidence of need, Australia lacks a
comprehensive national sexual and reproductive health strategy. We don’t
even have basic minimum standards for what our kids can be taught. Into
this policy vacuum comes Choices, Decisions, Outcomes, CDO for short, an
“innovative value-based education program for adolescents” that
“encourages responsible decision making regarding sexuality”.

CDO uses foetal models and flip books to instruct year seven and eight
students about “self worth” and self “respect”. In later years, free
giveaways such as comics and friendship dolls help teach kids that peer
pressure causes teen sex, which unavoidably results in pregnancy,
infertility, sexually transmitted infections and diseases that kill.

CDO is the brainchild of Jane Power. Jane’s background is as counsellor
at Pregnancy Help Geelong, an approved Right to Life organisation. CDO’s
core values are “to respect human life from conception” and “to
encourage saving sexual intimacy until marriage and then only between
husband and wife”. Interestingly, this statement of values is not
available on CDO’s website, to which students undertaking the course and
their parents are directed.

CDO’s partner organisation, Real Choices Australia, says the program has
been delivered to more than 100,000 Australian children. Real Choices
Australia’s affiliation is not apparent from its website, but it seems
to have links to the Catholic Church. Certainly, the funding for CDO is
coming from somewhere. A new education team’s kit costs $3000, and their
audio-visual requirements another $2000. Thankfully, we’re all
contributing to the cause. Donations to Real Choices Australia are tax
deductible.

One mother first heard about CDO was when her daughter came home from
school to report that pashing makes you pregnant. The girl attends a
public school in country NSW.

Pro-life, abstinence-only sex education crosses the line, pushing
religion into the secular school system where it doesn’t belong. It can
also be duplicitous, presenting false information about the
“side-effects” of abortion and either refusing to talk about
contraception, or mentioning only (inflated) failure rates.

But the biggest problem with abstinence-only sex ed is that it doesn’t
work. A report on the effectiveness of the US Government’s significant
investment in abstinence-only sex education found that youth delivered
the program had as much sex with as many partners, and started having
sex at the same time, as other adolescents.

Worse, when kids are taught CDO they miss out on abstinence-plus
approaches that really work, reducing sexually transmitted infections
without increasing rates of teenage sex.

State and federal politicians have questions to answer. They need to
explain why ineffective abstinence-only sex education is being taught in
public classrooms, and why they won’t put a strategy in place to make
sure our kids get the facts.