---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2009-02-01
tags: ~
title: Should We Play Big Brother with our Kids?
---
British and American parents are about to get it, and Australian parents
may want it too. Electronic babysitting, using a hard-to-remove
wristwatch device with a GPS chip, is coming to a retail and online
outlets soon. Want your tubby daughter to walk to primary school, but
need assurance she’s arrived safely? Have reason to doubt your year 9
son’s insistence he is spending Saturday night at a friend’s house?
Child location devices offer peace of mind to any parent with a mobile
phone or computer.

But at what cost? Some condemn the devices for letting parents to
abdicate their responsibilities to technology. Others are concerned
about child privacy.

The parental irresponsibility charge is inane. The parents of my
generation used to ring the houses we claimed to be at to check our
stories. Were they negligent, too? Surely the issue isn’t the legitimacy
of using technology—be it telephone or GPS device—to help parents
achieve their aims, but the appropriateness of those aims in the first
place. The real question is whether parents should be monitoring their
kids at all.

Where young children are concerned, the answer is clearly yes. Children
lack the experience and wisdom to accurately judge their own best
interests. We don’t make them accountable for their choices because of
this, even when they end in tragedy. But those without responsibilities
also lack rights. This means that if a parent feels they need a locator
device to keep their child safe, they are within their legal and moral
rights to use one.

Teenagers are different. The decision-making competency presumed in
adults does not instantly spring into being when a child turns 16, 18 or
21. Some 14 year olds may have sufficient understanding of relevant
facts, implications and consequences to decide most things for
themselves, while a handful of 21 year olds will lack the competency to
decide much without guidance.

This truth compels medicos to assess the competency of juveniles on a
case-by-case basis. To ask whether the juvenile before them has the
maturity to make the particular choice they face without parental
involvement.

This suggests that parents should also consider in each instance whether
fitting their teen with a locator device is wise. To ask every time
whether their teen has sufficient intelligence to decide for herself
where she will go and when she will return, and can be trusted at her
word.

The question of trust is at the heart of the dilemma posed by child
locator devices. One that pits short-term parental objectives—to keep
children safe and in control—against long-term ones, like how to deliver
the world a morally responsible adult.

Our moral development, like our physical development, proceeds in
predictable stages roughly correlated to age. By adolescence, most
western kids believe that what “everyone” says and does is what’s right.
Parents hoping to mature their child to the next stage, where they
understand the pre-eminence of society’s rules and precepts, must
progressively untie the apron strings so their child can roam free, even
if they stumble or fall.

That said, there is no cause for moral panic about child location
devices. Like the technologies that have preceded it, it is simply one
tool in the parental armoury for raising morally mature kids and—like
all such tools—is nothing a determined kid can’t get around.

We just need to remember that when it comes to raising responsible kids,
there’s no substitute for the freedom to make mistakes.