---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2009-10-11
tag: writings
title: Betrayal and the Shocking Lies of Rex Crane
---
“From Hero to Zero” ran the headline, a nice one to describe the fall
from grace last week of the Federal President of the Prisoners of War
Association of Australia, Rex Crane.

Crane took us all for a ride. Now 83, he claimed he was Australia’s
youngest POW. Abandoned in Malaya by his family at age 15, he said the
Japanese tortured him at Outram Road Jail in Singapore and on the
Thai-Burma railway.

But thanks to the due diligence of three women, one a professional
historian, the more pedestrian truth about the events of Crane’s life
during World War II are now known. He spent it at Adelaide High School,
after which he held a number of jobs, including running a pub. He was
never in the military.

Friends and families-including a step granddaughter who cried with him
as he told her stories of his wartime suffering-have responded to
Crane’s public undoing with shock, astonishment and bewilderment. This
has been followed by embarrassment, horror and mortification. Anger will
almost certainly come later. Those more distant to the Crane, including
war historians and returned servicemen, have used words like galled,
disgusted and appalled. The Australian Federal Police are now pursuing
Crane-who has received the top pension award, a $25,000 bonus payment
and a Commonwealth Gold Card covering all medical expenses-for fraud.

Crane’s story is one of betrayal. “No Judas, no story,” says writer and
broadcaster Libbi Gorr, and surely she is right. Betrayers occupied the
innermost ring of Dante’s inferno and Jane Austen’s *Sense and
Sensibility* is preoccupied with the theme. Since the dawn of the
Christian era, betrayal has been central to the seminal and everyday
stories that shape and describe our lives.

Odd then, that we find it so hard to define both act and emotion with
depth and precision. Disloyalty and treachery is the best the dictionary
can come up, while philosophers do little better. As Rodger L. Jackson
has noted, few treatments of the subject capture the elements of
character, circumstance and motive that give betrayal its flavour, and
determine the cost to victims.

Betrayal is an assault on trust. Rex Crane’s lies about his wartime
activities betrayed the most fundamental trust we offer those we love,
live with, befriend and admire-what we must offer if such a thing as a
relationship is to exist. An automatic, unquestioning faith that people
are who they claim to be. While publicly disowning him, as his step
granddaughter has done, may alleviate the guilt and shame society
unfairly heaps on those associated with wrongdoers by blood or marriage,
those closest to Crane may require professional support. How else to
ensure the anger they must feel is directed out towards him, rather than
in on themselves, eroding confidence in their character judgment or
morphing into depression.

Society must walk a similarly fine line. Veteran’s affairs Minister Alan
Griffin has rightly referred the case to the Australian Federal police,
and avoided buying into the claims being made by self-appointed
guardians of military authenticity that public and ex-servicemen are
regularly being ripped off by military “imposters” like Crane.

We must not allow betrayal to undermine our trust in what Rodger calls
“the world’s possibilities,” or increase our distrust or skepticism.
Because the truth is that most people are worthy of our trust. They
won’t let us down. And it is we who’d be the fools if we let men like
Crane make us see the world any other way.