---
assets: ~
published: 2009-01-08
tags: ~
title: "Allâ\x80\x99s Fair in the Battle of Ideas"
---
On Tuesday, Crikey broke a story about conservative magazine Quadrant’s
publication of an essay on scientific criticism by Sharon Gould. Gould
is described as having a PhD in Applied Science (biotechnology) and
being employed as a biotechnology informatics consultant.

But Gould is not a real person. Her essay, “Scare campaigns and science
reporting,” was a hoax, as Quadrant editor and cultural warrior Keith
Windshuttle discovered to his dismay when the journalist who broke the
story, Margaret Simons, rang him for comment. According to Simons, the
essay contained “false science, logical leaps, outrageous claims and a
mixture of genuine and bogus footnotes,” that Windshuttle should have
spotted.

Some journalists have treated the story with glee, setting off like
hounds after Gould’s real identity. Windshuttle’s nemesis, historian and
former Quadrant editor Robert Manne, was no less restrained. He told The
Age that he had “tears rolling down [his] cheeks” while reading the
bogus essay.

I don’t think we need to know Gould’s true identity or to laugh at the
elegance of the sting, which was designed to humiliate Windshuttle, and
cast doubt on the integrity of the conservative ideology he espouses. I
think we need to judge whether the hoax was fair. Or fair enough.

The use of shame and humiliation to discipline those who break the rules
and flout the powerful has fallen out of fashion in recent years, but is
central to hoaxes. The Ern Malley scam of the 1940s saw two traditional
poets publish what they saw as slapdash pretentious rubbish in an
avant-garde literary journal. More recently, American physics Professor
Alan Sokal exposed the acceptance of a paper “liberally salted with
nonsense” by editors of a cultural studies journal. Sokal claimed the
publication of his article proved that some disciplines would accept
anything as legitimate scholarship as long as it “sounded good” and
“flattered the editors’ ideological preconceptions.”

While embarrassment of individuals is the vehicle by which hoaxes take
effect, this is not always the primary objective. Often, the main game
is the slaying, through ridicule, of intellectual interlopers. Those
artists or scholars who dare to challenge existing orthodoxies and, by
so doing, threaten the power of those who promulgate them. Both Malley
and Sokal fall into this category.

But the latest hoax offers something new. Instead of orthodox
practitioners (traditional poets, scientists) holding their nascent
challengers (post-modernists, humanities academics) up for laughs, the
Windshuttle affair sees the intellectual gatecrashers fighting back. As
the hoaxer explains it, the Gould essay “derides” the “very
constructivist arguments” used in the climate-change denial articles
regularly published in Quadrant. Indeed, it’s hard not to feel that
insofar as the cultural left evinces exuberance about Windshuttle’s
downfall, this flows from relief that, for once, they are not the ones
being played as fools.

But here lies the crux of the issue; the very problem the hoax sought to
lay bare. Either what was done to Windshuttle was fair, or it was not.
An article is either worthy of publication because it demonstrates
adequate scholarship (logical precision, accuracy, evidential rigour),
or it does not. If one is applying the standards of thought and judgment
that is the hallmark of the university-educated-and one might rightly
expect this of those who hold themselves out as guardians of academic
standards-then the direction of an argument should be neither here nor
there when its worth is assessed.

It is fair, I think, to hold Windshuttle to account for inconsistent
application of his exacting standards of scholarship. In particular, for
only checking the footnotes of those with whom he disagrees. Pillorying
also seems justified for his failure to uphold even the most basic
editorial standards before putting “Gould” into print. Like ensuring he
could substantiate Gould’s claimed academic credentials by locating her
on a university website, or finding a paper she’s written in any of the
academic databases easily accessible on the web.

To the question of whether the exposure of such double standards was
important enough to sacrifice Windshuttle’s reputation, I think the
answer is, “yes.” Windshuttle is a public figure who made his name not
just by challenging the accuracy of some footnotes in the work of
historians like Henry Reynolds, but by suggesting their errors were part
of a deliberate attempt to deceive Australians about the true facts of
history. Such charges are extremely serious, going to the personal and
professional integrity of these scholars. Scholars whose substantive
views about Australia’s early history he did not like. To be hoisted on
one’s own petard in such a case not only seems justified, but evidence
of some sort of cosmic justice.

We value impartiality because there can be no fairness without it. We
value reason because, when properly deployed, it should see all of us
arrive at the same conclusions about the nature of a problem, and its
potential solutions. We value evidence because it provides a firm
foundation on which reason can proceed. We value these things not
because they are easy, but because they are hard for us to achieve.

At the heart of the culture wars was a conflict over different ways of
knowing. Against the university-educated “elites,” trained to use
careful and critical discourse to make their point were those deploying
more traditional ways of asserting authority: fear, force, ridicule,
exclusion.

Whether this latest salvo provokes retaliation, or allows us to finally
lay down arms and agree to respectfully disagree, remains an open
question.