---
assets: ~
published: 2009-11-23
tags: ~
title: Desperate or Deadbeat Dads?
---
In recent weeks, I seem to have become a bloke magnet. Two weeks ago at
the State Library cafe and one night last week at my usual watering
hole, I’ve had men in my ear. Sweet men, sad men, vulnerable men - some
recently divorced, others single for years - crooning variations on the
same tragic tale. A tale about children they love but no longer see.

Once, I would have called them deadbeat dads. My own parents split when
I was young but my father maintained scrupulous contact with my brother
and me, and was dismissive of men who didn’t. And I knew the facts: that
about 30 per cent of Aussie kids rarely or ever see the father who
doesn’t live with them; and that before 1989, when the law gave men a
choice about chipping in financially to support their children, only
about one-third did. But as I listened to the stories of these grieving
men, the moral issue was no longer clear. There is no shortage of
grievances, legitimate and otherwise, when a couple splits. But when
fathers want to share care of their children but

are granted access only on weekends - leaving the Child Support Agency
as the only institution affirming the role of men in their children’s
lives post-divorce - something seems amiss.

“I was more than a wallet to those children,” the man in the cafe told
me. “I parented them.” Later, a diary he had kept of his daughter’s
first words and subsequent language development would arrive in the
mail: proof of his commitment and grief.

The bloke at the bar, let’s call him Barry, was less certain of what he
had to offer to his daughter who is three, no four, no three. He hadn’t
seen her in years. “I don’t even have a place to live at the moment,” he
confessed. “Had all my ID stolen a few months ago and been couch-surfing
for the past three weeks.”

I heard the rest of his sentence as if he’d spoken it aloud. “I wouldn’t
be good for her, anyway.”

“She told me to bugger off,” he continued, speaking of his former
partner, a girl he’d got pregnant, then agreed to support. He sipped his
beer primly before cracking a wooden smile. “So I did.”

But here’s the real question. Does the fact that many men feel sad when
made to feel surplus to requirements in their own children’s life -
disenfranchised by the legal system or their former spouse - mean
they’ve been wronged?

Not necessarily. The terrible truth is that when relationships break
down, what is in the best interests of children may not be what’s best
for men.

Research by Australian researcher Jennifer McIntosh finds that shared
care is not the best arrangement for very young children and only works
well for older kids where parents are emotionally mature and get along
well. Men incapable of resolving the substance abuse, anger management
or emotional issues that can contribute to relationship breakdown in the
first place may not be the best influence on children, including their
own.

And according to the Australian Institute of Family Studies, there is
“compelling evidence” that it is parental conflict and the negative
economic consequences of divorce, not fatherlessness per se, that is
costly for children of divorce.

Deadbeat dads, or desperate, defeated and driven-away ones? You decide.