---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2009-09-18
title: Pulling Out the Racist Tag is a Lazy Way to Argue About Policy
---
There is little evidence to support racial motives behind criticism of
Obama.

THE cry of “racism” has sounded, and the hounds are off and running.
Since last week’s outburst by Joe Wilson during President Barack Obama’s
address to a joint session of Congress on health care - the congressman
called the President a “liar” - the international commentariat has
sought to divine the reasons for the remark, and Obama’s declining
popularity in the polls.

Some are sure they know the answer. *New York Times* columnist Maureen
Dowd said that, “… fair or not, what I heard was an unspoken word in the
air: You lie, boy!” Adding fuel to the charge of racism was former
president Jimmy Carter, who said that: “I think that an overwhelming
portion of the intensely demonstrated animosity towards … Obama is based
on the fact that he is a black man … the racism inclination … bubbled up
… because of a belief among many white people … that African Americans
are not qualified to lead this great country.”

What is wrong with this picture? In my view, the problem is clear. The
whipping up of national and international hysteria about an important
issue on the basis of no evidence at all. Motives are elusive, but facts
speak for themselves. Joe Wilson called the President a liar, not boy or
porch monkey or coon or jigaboo or any of the depressingly long list of
race-based insults for black Americans.

While heckling a president is unusual (the US Congress is a sedate place
compared with its British and Australian counterparts) neither the act
of shouting nor the word Wilson used demonstrates racist sentiment.
Sure, Wilson may have attacked the President because of the colour of
Obama’s skin (as a South Carolina senator he voted to keep the
Confederate flag flying above the state house), or he may have done so
because he profoundly disagreed with what the President was saying. The
evidence reveals nothing either way.

Former president Carter is operating in a similar fact-free zone. His
charge of racism seeks to tar not just an individual, but the motives of
many white Americans. “Most of the animosity white people feel towards
the President is because he is black” and “many white people believe the
President’s skin colour disqualifies him from leading the country” are
statements of fact.

But while numerous survey techniques exist to accurately catalogue the
depth and breadth of racist sentiment among Americans - to prove whether
Carter’s assertions are correct - the former president and Nobel Peace
Prize winner musters none. Just like columnist Dowd, he seems content to
make such claims on the basis of nothing more solid than his thoughts or
beliefs.

It’s not good enough. Average Joe and Josephine have little choice but
to make decisions and seek to persuade based on intuition, anecdote and
personal experience. They are not in a position to commission
double-blind placebo-controlled trials on which washing powder works
best, or statistically valid polling before they opine about what
“everyone” thinks about this or that. Even if they did, they might
struggle to interpret the results.

But opinion leaders, like others in positions of responsibility, are
different. What they say can critically influence the views of others
and the tone, tenor and direction of the political debate. They have a
duty to get it right, not just mouth-off to get a rise. This is why
evidence-based policy and medicine are all the rage. Surely
evidence-based opinion should be next.

The saddest part of the current kerfuffle is the damage it could do to
the President’s determination to eradicate racial inequality in the US.

As Obama noted in a recent speech to the National Association for the
Advancement of Coloured People, black Americans have a harder road than
whites. Blacks have borne the brunt of job losses from the global
financial crisis, are more likely to have poorer health than whites and
are five times as likely to end up in jail.

Tackling such inequities requires a willingness by the mostly white
“haves” to back structural change. Given the high levels of support
Obama garnered from white Americans during the election, there was no
reason to think such support would not be forthcoming. But Dowd and
Carter’s baseless charges of racism may have squandered the goodwill
required to achieve real change by putting whites on the defensive.
Falsely accused and crying victim, they worry aloud about being accused
of racism if they raise objections to the President’s policies.

Motives are elusive but facts speak for themselves. Racial inequity in
the US is real and must be attacked at its root. While the affiliations
and funding sources of those critiquing the President must be revealed,
where the sentiment behind criticism is unknown, it must be taken at
face value. Proof only that in a large country with a boisterous
democracy, not everyone will agree.