---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2009-08-11
tag: writings
title: One Step Forward, Two Back, in Fight for Reproductive Rights
---
RU486 is available, but in Queensland a teenager is charged over an
abortion.

This week’s announcement by Marie Stopes International that clients of
its clinics in Victoria, NSW, Queensland, the ACT and Western Australia
can now terminate pregnancies at less than nine weeks using RU486 is one
more step in Australian women’s struggle for full equality and
reproductive rights.

RU486 has had a chequered history in this country. For many years it was
effectively banned as a result of a deal brokered by both major parties
to secure former senator Brian Harradine’s vote to sell Telstra. Only in
2006, as a result of the efforts of a cross-party group of female
senators was the law changed, allowing RU486 to be regulated like all
other drugs.

A pharmaceutical company will soon apply for and be granted a general
licence to import and market the drug. Medicos will finally be able to
dispense the drug like all others, by prescription and on the basis of
patient need. But just as one door opens, several others threaten to
slam shut.

The most worrying development is in Queensland, where a teenage girl is
being prosecuted for having an abortion. Yes, you heard right. Next
month Tegan Leach, 19, will return to court with her boyfriend to defend
charges that he gave her RU486, and she used it, to abort an unwanted
pregnancy.

The couple seem certain to be found guilty. Abortion is in the criminal
code in Queensland, and the facts of the case suggest the young woman
and her boyfriend did the “crime”. That is, having discovered they were
pregnant, and judging themselves too young to be parents, they obtained
RU486 with the intention of causing her to miscarry.

You might think that in the face of this impending travesty pro-choice
Premier Anna Bligh would be looking for ways to help. First and
foremost, you might think that Bligh would be preparing a bill to
present to Parliament to reform an antiquated law that makes one of the
safest and most common medical procedures a felony.

You would be wrong. Instead, in a staggering display of ignorance and
obfuscation, Bligh has done her damndest to convince Queenslanders that
Leach’s situation is anomalous. Something to do with the fact that the
drug she took, RU486, was not prescribed by a doctor or isn’t approved
for general use. In reply to the truth - that what has happened to the
teenager could happen to any Queensland man, woman or medico involved
with abortion as long as the procedure remains a crime - she has burbled
about the need for a private member’s bill to come before parliament for
the issue to be decided.

Bligh, and the Government she leads, could move to change the law
tomorrow and should, given that removing abortion from the Crimes Act is
Labor Party policy and Bligh made numerous backroom promises before the
most recent election that she would reform the law if she won.
Queensland Labor: compromised one day, craven the next. One wonders
exactly what has to happen to women in Queensland before their
politicians act to represent them.

Luckily for women in Victoria, political integrity and guts are more
plentiful at Spring Street. We are going to need them. After successful
reform of Victoria’s abortion law last year - reform that means no
Victorian teenager will ever have to endure what Tegan Leach is going
through - pro-life forces are up in arms.

At a recent conference in Melbourne, on the subject of conscience no
less, pro-life doctors lambasted Victoria’s Abortion Law Reform Act for
requiring them to perform an abortion in an emergency. Instead they seem
to feel they have a right to let their female patients die. They plan to
take a test case to court.

Their chances of winning are nearly zero. Even the most restrictive
definition of a medical professional’s duty of care requires assistance
to be rendered in an emergency.

But truckloads of taxpayer resources will be consumed in defending the
case through the assertion, I would assume, that

in a liberal, plural democracy, women have rights, too. Namely, a right
to equality before the law and to be treated as more than human
incubators whose lives are worth little, or nothing at all.