---
assets: ~
excerpt: With no room at the Women’s, patients are at the mercy of religion
link: http://www.theage.com.au/opinion/society-and-culture/women-are-being-failed-by-our-hospitals-20091102-htcd.html
published: 2009-11-03
tag: writings
title: Women Failed by Catholic-Run Hospitals
---
There is no room at the Women’s. Once the hospital saw its mission as
the service of all the Victorian women. Now, women inquiring about
having their baby there will be asked their postcode. Should they fall
outside the hospital’s new geographical catchment area and be at small
risk of complication, they’ll be referred to a hospital closer to home.

Poor government policy and planning, an upward blip in the fertility
rate and Victoria’s burgeoning population has seen births jump 12 per
cent in Victoria over a three year period, but the number of maternity
beds fail to keep pace. As a consequence, the Victorian government now
“encourages” women to birth at their local, suburban hospital.

For most women, the major anxiety generated by the squeeze is finding
somewhere, anywhere, to have their baby. But behind the scenes, some
perinatal specialists and GPs who share the care of pregnant women with
hospitals are fretting about women being referred away from
non-sectarian public hospitals and towards institutions that are
Catholic-run.

The reason why is simple. Catholic-run hospitals, even those dedicated
to women’s health, have a number of services they will not provide. As
the Most Rev. Anthony Fisher explained earlier this year: “Catholic
healthcare institutions, whatever legal, financial or other pressure
they are under, may not cooperate with abortion, sterilization or
euthanasia.” In addition, and for religious reasons too, Catholic-run
healthcare institutions don’t offer a full range of contraceptive
services.

What are the downstream consequences of this refusal to “cooperate” for
patients? Some women discover, as they approach a planned caesarian
section, that they won’t be able to have their tubes tied at the time of
delivery, requiring them to undertake the cost, inconvenience and risk
of having the procedure done at a later date. Others, already reeling
from the blow of abnormal results from pre- natal tests or screens the
hospital did provide, find they must transfer to another institution if
they make the difficult choice to terminate. Women whose membranes
rupture too early may be denied surgery to remove the doomed fetus, and
even intervention to speed up the delivery. That is, unless sepsis is
diagnosed and the woman’s womb or life is at risk. Rape victims brought
into casualty will not be offered emergency contraception. If staff
suspect pregnancy, the woman will not eve be referred to a rape crisis
centre that does offer the pills.

Do Victorian women know the limits placed on their care when they enter
a Catholic-run hospital? For many, it seems, the answer is, ‘no.’ As one
GP put it, “I’m not sure women ever do fully understand the
implications.” Currently, there seems no attempt for referring hospitals
to consent women with regard to these issues, nor for Catholic-run
hospitals to make specific disclosures on such matters when women arrive
for care. For instance, neither the patient information guide, nor the
guidelines for those sharing the care of pregnant patients with the
Mercy makes any reference to the limits the hospital puts on services
because of its religious views.

Both Catholic-run health institutions, and the Governments that fund
them to provide essential healthcare services to Victorian taxpayers,
have an obligation to ensure that female patients, and the external
healthcare providers sharing care of such patients, are fully informed
about what the hospital’s religious philosophy might mean for patient
care. For a hospital to simply say they are Catholic and assume that
everyone knows what this means, including very young women, new migrants
to Australia and those from non- English-speaking backgrounds, fails the
most basic disclosure requirements necessary for informed consent.

But lack of consent is just a small corner of the problem. The real
issue is the decision by governments to pour public money into
institutions unable to offer a full range of medical services to half of
the public. The real problem is government policy that allows such
institutions to become central to healthcare arrangements designed to
serve all citizens despite knowing the limits such institutions place on
the care they provide to women.

Catholics, and any other faith-based minorities in Australia, are
entitled to their moral beliefs and to the expression of these through
the institutions they run. But women citizens and taxpayers have a right
to healthcare provision that does not put them at the mercy of those
views, and the healthcare information and options that flow from them.
There seems little problem with Catholic hospitals providing
boutique-care to women and men able to make an informed decision about
its suitability to their needs. But when women have no choice but to
become patients in this system for emergency and essential health care,
something is terribly wrong.

The Catholic Church sees the provision of health care as part of its
mission, believing that a Catholic-run hospital “serves the whole
community, especially the vulnerable.”

Pregnant women are vulnerable. Rape victims are vulnerable. Patients
without information and real options about their health care are
vulnerable.

Victorian women pay taxes, and are citizens with a right to informed
decision-making about and access to the full range of sexual and
reproductive health services. Not just those the Catholic-run hospital
nearest them is willing to provide.