---
assets: ~
published: 2009-04-19
tags: ~
title: Collaboration Takes Sting Out of Separation and Divorce
---
A kindler, gentler divorce may be a contradiction in terms, but the
means to achieve it has arrived in Australia. Just a few weeks ago at a
conference in Sydney, a group of good-hearted, specially trained lawyers
met to discuss the ways a marriage in this country could be dissolved
using a process called collaborative family law.

Founded in the USA twenty years ago, collaborative family law involves
separating couples and their lawyers sitting around a table and openly
and honestly discussing the range of matters of importance to them,
including the well-being of their children. The goal is to agree a fair
settlement that best addresses their individual needs, interests and
goals.

Negotiations are conducted courteously and in good faith, with both
parties bound to disclose all pertinent information and material fact,
and not to take advantage of “mistakes” by the other side. Should the
couple go to court, both collaborative lawyers are effectively sacked,
because before collaboration starts they sign an agreement disqualifying
them from litigating if it fails.

But what really makes collaborative law a winner is the space the
process makes for shared experts that are hired by both parties, and
don’t take sides.

Foremost among these is the child consultant, who meets with each of the
couple’s children in order to bring their experience and needs to the
negotiating table. The goal is for both spouses to comprehend their
children’s experience of conflict and their post-divorce requirements in
a deep and transformative way. The resulting wake-up call can lead
parents to change their attitude to their former partner and they way
they act around their kids, and to negotiate parenting arrangements that
support each child’s developmental needs.

I am the child of divorce. My parents separated in the early 1970s when
I was seven. There was alimony and visitation, a reconciliation followed
by divorce, and a custody battle that only ended when my mother agreed
to let my brother move in with my Dad. They rowed in person and over the
phone until I left home for University at age eighteen.

Around 12 per cent of children in intact families experience mental
health problems in childhood. This figure rises to 25 per cent for
children of divorce. Children need their parents to tune into their
needs when divorce happens, and to be emotionally available to them.
Conflict, which turns to acrimony as the years progress, gets in the way
of that happening, This is why the children of conflicted and litigated
divorces have the worst mental health outcomes of all.

A 2006 Australian study found that one third of children whose parents
reported high levels of conflict had psychological disturbance at
clinical levels. Other studies show they are more likely to leave school
early and more likely to divorce as adults. “Conflict in divorce impacts
children in terrible ways,” says Professor Jennifer McIntosh. “Children
can’t afford settlement processes that exacerbate conflict between
parents.”

A child-focused intervention in a collaborative divorce process may
reduce the conflict between parents and, consequently, improve the
quality of children’s relationships with both parents, and their mental
health outcomes

Sitting in a hotel conference room, listening to the potential of the
collaborative process to produce better outcomes for parents and
children, I felt a lump well in my throat. How different things might
have been for my brother and I-how much heartache might have been
avoided-had such an innovative legal process been around then.