---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2009-06-16
tag: writings
title: What we Have is the Failure to Communicate
---
We have a problem. Despite broad and sustained scientific consensus
about the growing incapacity of the planet to sustain us and the threat
posed by climate change, our elected decision makers and key corporate
players seem incapable of doing enough of what is required, to avert the
coming crisis.

This has caused despair among many of the climate scientists who
convened earlier this year in Copenhagen. Nine out of 10 of those polled
by The Guardian newspaper said they had lost faith in the ability of
decision makers to take the action necessary to restrict global
temperature.

The failure was variously blamed on political constraints, social
inertia and the psychological inability of human society to manage the
complexity, uncertainty and enormity of the issue. “I thought that we
could convince people,” said one. “But I fear that society is not up to
the challenge of a crisis like this.”

Some Australian scientists are similarly despondent. Having witnessed
the failure of empirical data and reason to persuade, academics such as
Graeme Pearman are now trying to unearth the elements of human nature
that make it, in his words, “so difficult for us to respond”.

But while such an approach is understandable and may have merit, I worry
about the conceptualisation of the inaction problem as one of
understanding (because everyone knows that when reasonable people
understand something, they act on it). Also concerning is the tendency
to define the problem as one caused solely by others, rather than by
advocates themselves.

This is particularly seen in the absence of critical reflection on the
communication strategies climate scientists and activists have employed
to date to provoke action on climate change.

There is good evidence that the Australian public is concerned about
climate change and wants decision makers to act.

Newspaper polls show readers nominating the problem as that posing the
greatest risk to their quality of life. A 2007 international poll found
92 per cent of Australians favoured measures to combat global warming,
putting them first among the 12 nations surveyed.

Yet, as social psychologists and marketers know, there is no straight
line, and often only a tenuous relationship, between what we know and
what we do. Staggeringly, few of the efforts designed to mobilise action
on climate change appear to be underpinned by proper national research
on public motivation and, subsequent to this, communications framing.
This is the case even where significant money has been poured into
public information campaigns (the UK), and where a government report on
climate change communications strategy cannot be accessed (Australia).
This is particularly concerning given that poorly crafted communications
efforts can have the opposite of the intended effect.

Recent analysis of the apocalyptic headlines and catastrophic images
that constitute the mainstay of much climate communications shows that,
in the majority, they provoke feelings of powerlessness rather than a
desire to act. Fear, guilt, anger, defiance, a desire to blame others
and feelings of exhaustion or irritation are also among the responses
the climate change message can provoke when poorly framed.

A more self-critical examination of what might be going wrong with
efforts to persuade might also consider the uncomfortable yet potent
observations made by philosopher Sarah Bachelard.

Bachelard, herself an activist, says that the sanctimoniousness of some
of her peers can impede successful communication and action for change:
“There can be a tone of self-righteousness, a kind of shrill moral
indignation, in the speech of those of us who protest and campaign … We
know that we are on the side of the angels, and in our own way we can
fail to do justice to the complex reality of most human action and
motivation. We get something out of ‘being right’ … (and) satisfaction
from making those who do not agree with us wrong.”

Finally, any effective campaign for change must recognise that reason
has as little hold on key decision makers as it does on the average
punter.

In a study that revolutionised the field of international relations,
political scientist Graham Allison demonstrated that government
decisions are not the result of considered choices made by rational
actors but the result of consensus building by leaders trying to satisfy
a range of political, personal and ideological agendas.

This implies that whatever the facts or rectitude of the case for
change, government action on the climate issue will be characterised by
incrementalism and compromise.

The sooner this is recognised, and strategy and tactics are geared to
account for it - something that does not appear to have been done by
some environmental groups, nor by the Australian Greens senators, with
respect to the emissions trading scheme - the more likely advocates will
be able to capitalise on the opportunities for change that do exist.

A failure of communication and tactics, not of understanding may be the
cause of inaction on climate change. Until these problems are
acknowledged and tackled, climate advocates, however well-meaning, may
be part of the problem, not the solution.