---
assets: ~
published: 2009-06-05
tags: ~
title: "Youâ\x80\x99re Off to a Party? Its no Laughing Matter, You Sick Swine"
---
Why would someone hold a swine flu party, a celebration intended to help
you catch the virus? If you are invited to one, should you attend?
Should viral socialites be shunned and pilloried, or are they providing
a much-needed warning to those in charge of public communications about
H1N1 that they need to think again?

Our family has been upfront and personal with H1N1 influenza, or human
swine flu. One son has taken a course of Tamiflu after discovering the
child he takes the train to school with each morning was diagnosed with
it. The other’s school closed on Monday after a run of confirmed cases.

Throughout the siege, notes, emails and website updates have been
flying. Official advice has streamed from newspaper and radio. Crudely
summarised, the central message is this: “Do everything you can to avoid
catching and spreading swine flu. But if you or your kids do get it,
don’t panic. It’s no big deal.”

Needless to say, such advice is confusing. Particularly so to those with
a high degree of motivation to make sense of what they are being told so
they can act on it - namely parents responsible for protecting their
kids. Such parents are likely to be among the approximately 10 per cent
of Victorians who are alert, alarmed and ready to act when a public
health crisis is at hand, not the 90 per cent who are described by risk
communication experts as apathetic.

As I see it, swine flu parties are the consequence of poor
communications from health officials to the public about the crisis.
Such one-size-fits-all messaging might have caused a minority to believe
- mistakenly as it turns out- that a swine flu party is an intelligent
response to the risks posed by the pandemic. In the face of confusing
official advice and an absence of additional information to explain why
that advice actually makes sense, educated and anxious people have
filled in the blanks.

They have assumed that getting infected with swine flu today causes mild
illness but confers immunity against future, more virulent strains, and
so the light bulb concept of the swine flu party was born.

As it turns out, both assumptions are mistaken, or at least premature.
It may be that swine flu only ever causes mild sickness in those who
catch it, or it may turn out that some people actually wind up in
hospital or dead. Perhaps certain subsections of the population are
particularly vulnerable. There simply have not been enough cases and
enough time for experts to draw definite conclusions from the data we’ve
got. There is also no certainty that those who come down with H1N1 today
will have protection from a mutated and more virulent strain tomorrow
or, if they do, how long such protection will last.

Swine parties may also cause unintended and unsavoury consequences for
those who didn’t attend. The greater the number who catch the virus, the
greater the odds that those who may be particularly vulnerable - very
young children, pregnant women - will be exposed. Doing what we can to
slow transmission, not speed it up, gives time for a vaccine to be
available to protect high-risk groups.

It also extends, rather than compresses, the mutation timeline, reducing
the likelihood that we will face a more virulent strain, or at least
delaying it, giving us more time to prepare.

I feel confident no one planning or attending a swine flu party intends
to cause harm, either to themselves or others. My point is that unless
health officials engage more effectively with the segment of the
community that is actively engaged with the crisis, such intellectual
errors - and the unwise decisions that follow in their wake - are
inevitable.

So what can we do? Already, the World Health Organisation has signalled
its intention to revise its definition of pandemic in response to what
it has learned from the H1N1 outbreak so far. The new definition is
likely to take in the severity of future viruses, not just their spread.

Australian political leaders and health bureaucrats need to be similarly
bold in their assessment of what has worked, and what hasn’t, in their
communications to the public about swine flu. In particular, they need
to ditch the monolithic idea of “the public” altogether.

Instead, they need to recognise that different sections of the community
need different types and amounts of information in a public health
crisis. Modern messaging mediums and methods must be employed to ensure
messaging is relevant - in terms of both sophistication and volume - to
a range of audiences. As the swine flu party phenomenon reminds us,
everyone’s health depends on it.