---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2009-12-06
tag: writings
title: Kissing a Friend Goodbye
---
A new friend of mine recently told me a story about an old friend of
hers. I use the term “friend” advisedly here because friendship is what
this story is all about.

Ellen was asked by her school chum Cassandra to babysit her child so
that Cassandra could nip off to a networking work function. She said she
would be back no later than 4pm. In the event, Cassandra didn’t turn up
until near midnight, having sent Ellen just one text message advising of
her changed plans. Cassandra’s little boy missed Mummy, forcing Ellen to
both manage and “cover up” for what she felt was a serious case of bad
mothering.

When Ellen asked for the favour to be returned in kind, Cassandra
agreed, then welshed on the deal. Ellen arrived to find her little girl
in the care of Cassandra’s hubby, when Ellen had specifically requested
that the child be minded by Cassandra herself. “That’s it,” Ellen
shouted at her old friend. “You and I are through!” And so things have
stood, though now Ellen has doubts. Was she too hasty? Harsh? Or was she
right to have taken a stand?

Ending a long-standing friendship is hard to do. The reason why lies at
the heart of what we understand friendship to be - a do-or-die,
through-thick-and-thin pledge to another person. As our faith in the
perpetual nature of romantic partnerships declines, a forever dedication
to our mates has arisen to take its place.

But if fidelity is part of the modern definition of friendship, then
dumping a friend can be seen to reflect poorly not just on the
Cassandras of the world but the Ellens, too. I understand how we got to
a place where preserving old friendships feels like a moral duty. We got
there because however much we exalt the choice and contingency that
defines modern romantic relationships (we marry for love and, if
dissatisfied with our choice, pull the plug and try again), it also
makes us nervous.

In the old days, everything was decided for us - work, who we would
marry, the community in which we’d come of age, raise children and die.
Gossip was rife, jobs were for life and divorce as rare as the social
isolation that these days can be the consequence of constant job, house
and partner upgrades.

Inventing your life day after day offers significant upsides (doing what
you want, where you want and with whom you want) but also downside risks
(wrong choices can leave you unemployable, isolated and alone). Into the
breach comes an increasingly non-contingent definition of friend. A
person to whom one owes a secure loyalty, not one contingent on the
failure of someone smarter, richer or funnier to come along.

Despite this, there are circumstances where we are right to kiss an old
friend goodbye. If a friend abuses your trust and takes advantage of
you, they are not really a friend. Loyalty without limits sets the stage
for abuse and becomes a destructive feature of a person’s moral psyche,
not a virtuous one. Ellen needs to set limits on the friendship and
explain these to Cassandra, as well as the consequences of their being
overstepped. Cassandra’s response will speak volumes about the value she
puts on the friendship.