---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2009-03-29
tag: writings
title: Parallel Imports and Copy Wrongs
---
Australian publishing is a success story. In contrast to the uneven
product of the heavily subsidized film industry, publishing continues to
go from strength to strength. Around 45% of general audience books sold
in Australia have been published here, and 40% of the top 5000 trade
books have Australian authors. Not bad for an island at what Former PM
Paul Keating reportedly described as the universe’s arse-end.

So why is the Rudd Government poking sticks at a winning game? Why has
it asked the ideologically purist Productivity Commission to consider
the parallel importation issue again?

The debate about parallel imports may seem confused and arcane, but it’s
one that affects us all.

Do you read? Watch films, many of which are adapted from books? Proposed
changes to copyright law will mean fewer Australian writers with less
time to write. This means fewer books, and so less jobs in the
publishing industry, with all with predictable downstream effects on
Australian printers and independent book sellers.

The Productivity Commission wants the Government to reduce the
protection Australian authors currently have from parallel imports. If
they are successful, one year out from the publication of the Australian
edition of their book, authors would find foreign copies being flogged
by “would-you-like-a-book-with-that” retail chains like Dymocks and K
Mart at prices that will earn them little or nothing at all. They would
find themselves alone among their US and UK counterparts in being made
subject to such let-the-market rip forces.

This is why Australian writers wrote to the Commission to plead for
retention of the current law. Most authors earn peanuts. The average
writer’s income is $11,000, and practically no one makes enough to live
off their work. No wonder the Commission’s proposed changes are scaring
writers to death. Said one, who estimates that changes to the law will
reduce her Australian-made income by two-thirds: “The money I make
from…copyright to my work is my livelihood; the way I pay my mortgage
and eat. Proposing changes to copyright laws are, to me, the equivalent
to discussing redundancy for an employee…I have attempted to keep alarm
and fear from my tone when writing this submission. It wasn’t easy.”

The counter argument, that changes to the law will benefit consumers,
isn’t backed by facts. In fact, a comparison provided to the Commission
by a conglomerate of 180 independent booksellers, found Australian books
were actually cheaper than editions sold in the US and UK. Of course, a
convulsion in exchange rates could alter that, but is anyone seriously
suggesting we hang such critical cultural policy on prevailing rates of
exchange?

Even the Commission doesn’t claim that the current law makes Australian
books dearer. Only that, in what it admits is a largely data-free zone,
that it has the potential to do so.

So what gives? This is the 6th inquiry into parallel importation in just
over twenty years. Why keep pushing to change a legal framework that was
updated in 1991, and nearly all stakeholders agree is working well?

Independent publisher Henry Reynolds reckons it’s ideology at work. That
despite the success of Australia’s parallel importation laws, they
remain a pebble in the shoe of economic rationalists. And that former
NSW Premier Bob Carr sits on the Dymocks board, and has been agitating
for change for years.

Change for the better, or to toe an ideological line? Free trade for
Australian authors alone, or fair trade for all? Let’s hope for good
sense when the Rudd government comes to decide.