---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2009-02-08
tag: writings
title: Global Gag Leaves Blood on Our Hands
---
For Labor, the problem seems grim. Foreign Affairs Minister Stephen
Smith can either follow the lead of the Obama administration in lifting
Australia’s version of the global gag rule, or ensure we remain the only
country in the world that limits its foreign aid in this way.

What is the global gag? In Australia, they are policy guidelines
instituted by the Howard Government in exchange for anti-choice Senator
Brian Harradine’s vote to partially privatize Telstra, that deny
development aid monies to organizations that offer women full and honest
advice about all forms of contraception and abortion, or access to safe
services.

If Smith lifts the gag (and he can do so administratively, no new
legislation is required) he puts Labor’s own conservative Christian
members off side, and alienates Family First Senator Stephen Fielding,
who believes that his opposition faith-based opposition to safe abortion
and most modern contraception is a sound basis for denying women in
developing countries information about, and access to such services,
even when they are legal.

If the Minister keeps the gag tight, he makes you and I-taxpayers whose
funds are being diverted from legitimate family planning programs to
church-approved ones that teach abstinence and “natural” family planning
methods proven not to work-complicit in the suffering and death of women
in the developing world. Suffering and death caused by continual forced
pregnancies, and the horrific consequences of unsafe abortion, including
sterility and the orphaning of children through the deaths of their
mothers.

An estimated 19 million unsafe abortions are carried out each year in
developing countries. According to UNICEF, unsafe self-inflicted methods
include the consumption of detergents, strong tea, alcohol mixes and
malaria tablets, as well as the insertion of knitting needles, sharpened
reeds and clothes hangers. Unqualified providers also carry out
procedures, usually in unregulated and unsanitary conditions.

The result? 68,000 women die each year from unsafe abortion, with
hundreds of thousands more are injured or maimed. \
According to IPAS, an international organization dedicated to preventing
abortion-related deaths, more than 500,000 women have died from unsafe
abortions during the eight years of the last Bush administration, which
re-imposed the gag the moment it took office.

The gag rule puts blood on our hands.

Deaths from unsafe abortion are entirely preventable, but they cannot be
prevented if the 200 million women the United Nations estimates want to
delay or avoid pregnancy are denied access to comprehensive information
about pregnancy prevention, and access to contraception and safe
abortion. They can be prevented, according to Shalini Nataraj of the
Global Fund for Women, with funding for holistic, culturally appropriate
and realistic reproductive health programs that tell women the whole
truth about their options, and offer them modern medical help to
implement their choices.

So which way will Smith jump? The truth is, no one knows. He has been
“considering” the issue since the Parliamentary Group on Population and
Development delivered a comprehensive report recommending the ban be
lifted more than a year ago. To those keen for a decision to be made
sooner rather than later, he had this to say. “We’ll do it in our own
time. We’re not going to be driven by the decision that President Obama
has made.”

But with unsafe abortion causing 13 percent of all maternal deaths
worldwide, many in our region, I’d say the matter is urgent.

If you agree, you might want to give Smith’s office a call, or send an
email, to let him know it’s time.