---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2009-06-20
tag: writings
title: "Thereâ\x80\x99s no Rule Book for Families"
---
“I was upset by what happened. In fact I don’t think I’ve ever felt so
humiliated in my life. I understand that the president made a ruling
based on the current rules. But as any mother knows, sometimes families
don’t play by the rule book … I hope this allows us to have a discussion
about how we balance these things and respect the work of working
families regardless of whether it’s mothers or fathers …”

These are the words of freshman Greens senator Sarah Hanson-Young,
describing Thursday’s decision by Senate president John Hogg to evict
her two-year-old daughter, Kora, from the chamber. The baby was a
“stranger in the house” and, by Hogg’s interpretation of ancient
standing orders, not allowed to be present during voting.

Hanson-Young was still upset when she made her comments, which may
account for their rawness and revelatory nature. I was intrigued by her
use of the word humiliation to describe how she felt, and gratified by
her recognition of fathers as among the parents wanting a reasonable
balance between work and life.

Humiliation is the loss of pride that brings one low or compels one to
submit. It can be brought about through bullying, intimidation, physical
or mental mistreatment, or by embarrassment if a person is presented as
having committed a socially or legally unacceptable act.

Humiliation, and its kissing cousin shame, play significant roles in
shaping women’s experience of reproduction and motherhood.

I was reminded of this recently by a friend who supported her
18-year-old daughter through a second trimester abortion. For my friend,
both her daughter’s denial of the reality of her pregnancy and the
postures adopted by all the young women at the clinic, were portraits in
female humiliation and shame.

I wasn’t sure I understood. “Had the doctors said anything to the women?
Or the medicos they’d encountered before getting to the clinic?”

“No, Leslie,” my friend replied. "The shame was about being female. They
weren’t supposed to be pregnant when they didn’t want to be, and then
they were cramped and bleeding and leaking milk.

“They feel out of control and vulnerable and dependent and that’s not
how anyone likes to feel, but these are modern girls, and so the whole
thing made them feel like failures in the feminist sense, too. They were
(she fished around for the right word) humiliated.”

Hanson-Young’s humiliation had a similar texture. At the mercy of
motherhood’s vagaries, she was exposed before her peers as not being
entirely in control and in charge of her fate. This would have
undermined her claim to professionalism, a standard clearly not modelled
on anyone with family responsibilities, yet critical for anyone looking
for respect and new on the job.

There are two ways such humiliation can be managed. The first is for
parents like Hanson-Young to cop it sweet. To see humiliation as just
deserts for their failure to, at all times and in all places, get the
balance between work and family right and, when it gets hard, to keep
their struggles far from public view.

The second is to resist, to insist that the failure isn’t with the
hard-working, well-meaning and right-thinking young men and women who
seek to combine paid work and active parenting, but with the rules that
make this so hard.

And, having done this, to demand clearer and more flexible regulations
that account for the needs of parental parliamentarians.

On Monday, Greens leader Senator Bob Brown intends to do just this.
Brown will pursue a motion of dissent with regard to Hogg’s ruling, and
advance what he calls some “post-horse-and-buggy” standing orders for
the Senate.

In Australia today, both the joys and humiliations of raising young
children are largely the province of women. But it doesn’t have to be
that way. By correcting her initial characterisation of the problem she
faced as that of a working mother to that of a working parent,
Hanson-Young contributed to the articulation of the work-life balance
issue as one for both men and women who are parents now, or wish to be
in the future.

Men who share the work of earning and caring for children are the
solution to the work-family imbalance problem within Parliament and
beyond its hallowed halls. They ensure that the work-family imbalance is
seen as a concern for everyone, and not just a humiliation that women
must endure and everyone else can ignore.