---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2010-09-12
tags: ~
title: New Problem With No Name
---
The first problem with no name was uncovered in the 1960s by a feminist
named Betty Friedan. Once named, the problem had a chance of having its
parameters defined and negative consequences addressed.

Now, we are in the grip of another problem with no name. Yet the
evidence is everywhere that worthy individuals are strangling in its
grip and that in democratic societies the quality of public debate and
political decision-making is staggering under its weight.

The problem is a growing and collective regression in the way we decide
what is right and true, and, on the basis of this knowledge, how to act.

How did we decide in the past? Back in the day, people knew what was
true because they felt it in their bones or because their customs and
traditions spelt it out. Or they knew because powerful men in their
community who claimed to represent their chosen god, or gods, told them
or the local tribesmen commanded they understand it on pain of death.

Arguably, the march of Western nations through the enlightenment and
into the prosperity and social stability we enjoy today, has been the
result of new ways of knowing. Since the 18th century, decision-making
that involves persuasion by dispassionate rational argument and evidence
has been the rage.

But now, it seems, the titans of ignorance are struggling to reassert
command. To watch them in action, tune in to *Fox News* or shock-jock
radio or the comments section of any opinion website. What you’ll find
there is more than evidence of the Dunning-Kruger effect or what
Bertrand Russell referred to as the certainty of the stupid. You’ll also
witness what John Birmingham calls the toxic, self-defeating culture of
rednecks and the “calculating corporate succubus [that] both feeds on
it, and exploits it for cheap labor and ready cannon fodder”.

Part and parcel of this malignant culture is the deployment of threat,
deception or slight of hand to silence dissent, or to manufacture
consent. Here the greatest ridicule is reserved for those who dare to
imply that their views are guided by reason, evidence and concern for
the public good, rather than circular logic designed to pander to
self-serving interests. Because, hey, it’s all just opinion anyway and
everyone’s got one of those, so why give one person’s more weight?

This is the true clash of civilisations. Or, to be more precise, the
internecine collision of different ways of running a society that
determines whether you get a civilisation or a nasty, brutish Hobbesian
wasteland.

In one corner are the critical thinkers who’ve spent years trying to
wrap their heads around complex information and evidence so they can
offer an informed view on public policy. They deploy reason and evidence
in a good faith attempt to persuade their fellow citizens to choose one
course over another.

In the other are those who seek to get their way to serve the best
interests of themselves, their family and their mates. They deploy the
time-honoured tricks of the influence trade - charisma, threat, trickery
and pork barrelling - while depicting the world as forever and
intractably dog-eat-dog and anyone who doesn’t know it as a chump.

Who will win the battle? It’s too early to say. But I fear for the
experts - hampered by values of fair play that prohibit logical
fallacies, question-begging and playing the person instead of the ball -
even if it helps them win the day.

Bloody sanctimonious elites.