---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2010-11-07
tags: ~
title: Who Has the Courage to Stand Up for State Schooling?
---
Are there big ideas in Australian politics any more? Or big politicians
with big principles and the wit and courage to stand by - and for -
them?

The answer may be “no”. The forces decimating visionary and moral
leadership include the hollow machine men running the main parties,
their small target pre-election strategies of pacification and divide
and rule, and the docile and dense political progeny to which corrupt
internal processes give birth.

The biggest loser in this political race to the bottom is public
education.

In the US, 90 per cent of the children attend public schools. In
Australia, the figure is just 66 per cent and falling, as students
follow the money flowing (with few or no strings attached) from
taxpayers into the private system. The results have led to some private
school students enjoying as much as a 62 per cent edge in resources
compared with any of their public school peers. They also reveal
Australia as having among the greatest gaps between high- and
low-performing 15-year-olds - disparities the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development says are owed in large part to the
student’s class, social and family background.

Public education is all about redressing such inequalities of
opportunity that arise from accidents of birth.

Children are not born equal. Each is unique, and blessed - or cursed -
with a particular family and community. Some will come into the world
healthy and have two happy, employed and otherwise high-functioning
parents. Others may start life struggling with poor health or disability
and with parents encumbered by poverty, illness or addiction.

What any child gets - genetically or family-wise - is the luck of the
draw. Nearly all Australians would agree that the child should not be
blamed or suffer the negative consequences of circumstances beyond his
or her control.

Public education starts with this agreement and then goes one visionary
and extraordinary step further. In the spirit of individual endeavour on
which liberal democratic countries such as Australia were founded, it
proposes that not only should no child suffer the consequences of
unchosen circumstances of birth, but each should be granted the same
opportunity to flourish and generally get on in life.

Such equal opportunity is not construed as a gift, but a birthright,
founded in notions of fairness and equality between all people.

Yet, despite the obvious equity issues, loud and proud defenders of
state schooling are few and far between. You can’t slide a credit card
between Labor and Liberal on the issue - both parties have created
rapacious political constituencies for privileged educational services
that must now be serviced by the taxpayer teat in the run-up to every
election. There are even murmurs that the Greens are facing internal
dissent on the party’s principled view that governments should
prioritise the public education system and that equity must guide
decisions about funding.

Perhaps the impact of universal schooling on progressive generations of
Australians has been so profound that we fail to recognise its
contribution to the prosperous, democratic and largely harmonious
society Australia is today.

This may be true but it’s no excuse. Not for politicians and not for us,
the voters, who must insist on answers from candidates for office about
their plans to defend them.

<hr/>
A heartwarming addendum. Three days after this piece ran and during the
Victorian election campaign, the Labor Premier of Victoria John Brumby
announced a [$200 million dollar funding boost for private
schools](http://www.theage.com.au/victoria/state-election-2010/heat-on-brumby-to-cut-stamp-duty-20101109-17m51.html).