---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2010-08-29
tags: ~
title: "Australiaâ\x80\x99s Hung Parliament and the Governor Generalâ\x80\x99s Moral
  Dilemma"
---
Last week questions were raised about whether Quentin Bryce should
excuse herself from the Governor-General’s role in the event of a hung
parliament because of a conflict of interest. Bryce’s son-in-law, Bill
Shorten, is a Labor MP likely to have a senior role in the Gillard
government if it retains power.

In response to the outcry, the Governor-General has sought legal advice
on “concerns raised about her personal position in the current political
circumstances”.

Instances of conflict of interest are recurring ethical and legal issues
in societies governed by the rule of law. This can be seen in ancient
maxims that warn a man not to “serve two masters” or be a “judge in his
own cause.”

Conflicts are inevitable. Public officers have family, friends and
colleagues to whom they owe loyalty. Sometimes their duties can
conflict, like where their role positions them to make decisions that
could materially benefit those to whom they are personally tied.

Where this occurs, public officers must recognise it and act swiftly to
address the problem. Failure to do so can undermine trust in the
integrity of the decision, the office and the institutions of democratic
society generally.

What all this boils down to is a distinct set of propositions. First,
that having a conflict of interest isn’t what makes you wrong, it’s the
failure to address an actual or perceived one that’s the problem.
Second, identification of a potential conflict does not and must not be
understood to impugn the office-holder’s personal integrity.

This second point, so misunderstood in the debate so far, is worth
emphasising. No one concerned about conflict is saying Bryce lacks
integrity. Rather, they want consideration of a more abstract question,
which is this: is it in the best interest of Australia that someone in
the Governor-General’s role, and with her family ties, excuse herself
from making decisions about the formation of Australia’s next government
in order to avoid bias or the perception of bias?

The general, rather than personal, nature of this question explains why
a person with conflicts cannot effectively redress them by swearing to
act in an impartial way. Behaviour need not actually be biased for
public trust to be damaged, a perception of bias is enough. This is why
public officers are morally obliged to absent themselves from decision
where there is a conflict or others could see it that way.

Those who raised concerns at the Governor-General’s family ties were
driven by concerns about good governance. They have been disheartened by
the seizure of the issue by those with republican and partisan agendas.
Such rough handling of a matter of principle also insults the public,
which has made clear at this past election that they yearn to be treated
like intelligent citizens capable of principled debate.

The advice handed to the Governor-General on Friday suggested that while
the legal situation was clear, the moral one was open. The
Solicitor-General said that while Bryce was under no legal obligation to
disqualify herself, her personal relationships “fall to be managed as a
matter of prudence”. Prudence is a moral virtue meaning wisdom or good
judgment.

Whether it would be wise for Bryce to make critical calls about power,
or whether it would be prudent to delegate this power to someone else,
remains a judgment she must make.