---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2010-07-04
tag: writings
title: A Few Good Men and Stephen Milne Rape Allegations
---
Important stories can hit-and develop-at the wrong time. Like in the
days leading up to a coup that delivered Australia its first female
Prime Minister. Such losses are an inevitable part of an unpredictable
news cycle, but sometimes they must be resisted. Some stories are just
too important to let fall off the radar.

One such story concerns former Senior Detective Scott Gladman. Gladman
was the officer charged with investigating rape allegations made by a 19
year old woman against AFL footballer Stephen Milne six years ago. The
case was eventually dropped. In a statement-released at the time and
again when the story resurfaced-police said they had concluded on the
basis of advice from the Director of Public Prosecutions and the results
of “a thorough investigation” that there was insufficient evidence to
prosecute the sportsman.

Gladman tells a different tale, one backed up by his fellow
investigating officer Mike Smith, another ex-cop. A tale of being
hounded and pressured by fellow members of the force to “make it go
away” and not “do the job as best you can.” A tale of being told the
woman was “just one of those footy sluts” and of police being contacted
directly by those with “vested interest in the possible outcome for the
club.” A story of player interview tapes being stolen from desks and
transcripts of interview found on a photocopier, and of the
alleged-victim’s statement being leaked to the club, revealing her
identity. And a tale of the senior officers to whom Gladman complained -
those in charge of the sexual crimes squad and assistant commissioner of
the region at the time-failing to respond to his concerns and do all
that they could to make things right.

Thankfully, the Office of Police Integrity are now investigating, with
the Chief Commissioner promising to re-open the investigation if
allegations that police deliberately sought to compromise it can be
proved.

The initial findings of such probes have been explosive, with raids on
the criminal investigation unit uncovering the loss of crucial, and
mostly irreplaceable, evidence including master tapes of initial
interviews, reports from lead investigators and parts of the brief of
evidence.

Gladman makes plain that he thinks the case against Milne should have
gone ahead, and a jury left to decide the player’s guilt or innocence.
“There is a prima facie case still sitting there in that box at that
office that should be answered by a jury,” he said. “Stephen Milne is an
innocent person until he’s proven guilty in a court of law. However, we
never got that far, because the…natural flow of justice was
interrupted.”

He said that telling the woman that, “the brief had been put to bed” was
one of the worst experiences of his career. For colleague Mike Smith, it
was a turning point. He says he lost “…a hell of a lot of faith.”

It is this part of the story that moves me most. The startling
revelation that in a modern Australian policeforce. there appears no
place for these two good men. Indeed, it may be Gladman’s and Smith’s
abundant integrity-demonstrated in their initial pursuit of justice
without fear or favour, and their insistence on seeking it again-that
makes them such a poor fit with contemporary police culture.

A culture in which what some cops seem to think matters most is “to be
seen to be more important in their eyes to the club … [by doing]
anything they c[an] … to help.”