---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2010-05-31
tags: ~
title: The Patenting of Human Genes Must Be Stopped
---
Craig Venter is back in the news. The entrepreneurial geneticist
recently announced he has created a new form of synthetic life. The new
microbe, which thrives and replicates with only a man-made genome, paves
the way for a world full of organisms that are built to order rather
than evolved.

The technique, reported in the peer-reviewed journal *Science*, required
20 scientists, ten years and $USD40 million to develop. ExxonMobil,
however, has already placed an order with the J Craig Venter Institute
for an algae that can convert carbon dioxide from the atmosphere into
fuel, taking estimates of value into the trillions.

So far, concerns about the development by ethicists and religionists
have been predictable, and largely miss the point. Yes, there are risks
the organism could jump the lab, but Venter has inserted what he says
are fail-safe mechanisms into the microbe to render it harmless in the
outside world. All scientific inquiry entails some risk. The question is
whether those risks can be managed and are worth taking given the
possible benefits.

It is also true that Venter’s contribution allows humans to play God,
but surely this is what humans have long sought to do. How else can we
understand humankind’s attempts to predict earthquakes or vaccinate
against diseases than a spirited attempt to control and influence the
vagaries of the natural - or God given - world?

The real problems posed by the Venter development are the stale legal
and policy frameworks governing the world into which it’s been birthed.
Venter makes much of the “societal good” he believes will come of what
he describes as “one of the most powerful technologies and industrial
drivers”. He says he is concerned that the applications of his work are
used “for the benefit of all”.

Maybe. But in a world where key features of modern day patent law date
back to the 1600’s, and permit individuals or corporations to lock up
scientific knowledge as a source of private profit, consideration of the
public good remains optional.

Ventor’s history suggests a keen interest in making knowledge critical
to public health private intellectual property. His man-made microbe
contains watermarks, five amino acid codes, that include quotations, an
email address and the names of people involved in the £30million project
(Dr Frankenstein not included).

In the 1990s, his former company Celera Genomics raced against a
publicly funded project to sequence the human genome. At the time, he
had already applied to control the intellectual rights on more than 300
genes.

Luckily, he lost. In 2000 then-US President Clinton and British Prime
Minister Tony Blair jointly announced that an international consortium
working cooperatively and funded by public monies had produced a rough
draft of the genome, which a White House press release said would “lead
to new ways to prevent, diagnose, treat and cure disease”.

But we may not be so lucky next time, and this is the point. New areas
of science like genomics have long been outpacing the laws and policies
that seek to govern them. Legislators and regulators urgently need to
catch up.

Our view is that where existing research and intellectual property
frameworks are adequate to ensure that the building blocks of life -
whether evolved or created-remain in public hands, well and good.

But where such frameworks tilt towards handing any individual or
corporation sole ownership of knowledge, knowledge that belongs to and
can be used to benefit all of us, we have a problem. A problem most
recently seen in the shut down of research critical to discovering the
cures for diseases like autism, brain cancer and neurological disease by
StemCells Inc on the grounds that the researcher was using a technique
he had helped develop but they had patented.

Patents over genes, the building blocks of life or what Venter calls
‘DNA computer code,’ are wrong. They are wrong in moral and in practical
terms. They are wrong because they allow individuals or corporations to
exclusively control information that belongs to all of us, and wrong
because their patents discourage scientific progress or reserve its
benefits to those who can pay.

This view is shared by Nobel prize winners Joseph Stiglitz and John
Sulston, who recently argued in *The Wall Street Journal* that gene
patents, “not only prevent the use of knowledge in ways that would most
benefit society, they may even impede scientific progress. Every
scientific advance is built on those that came before it. There is still
a great deal to learn about our genes, particularly how they contribute
to disease. Gene patents inhibit access to the most basic information”.

Venter’s synthetic life form only adds weight to the passionate claims
from medical associations, geneticists, patients and academics have been
making for years that the patenting of human genes is unproductive and
unfair and must be stopped.

Next month a long-awaited report from the Australian Senate into the
impact of the granting of patents over human and microbial genes will be
handed down. Australian lawmakers must not miss this critical
opportunity to ensure that this country’s regulatory framework places
the health and wellbeing of the Australian people and Australian
environment above private profit.

Scientific knowledge of evolved and created life must remain in public
hands.

By Leslie Cannold and Luigi Palombi

*Professor Luigi Palombi is Director of the Genetic Sequence Right
Project at the Australian National University and author of Gene
Cartels.*