---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2010-08-15
tags: ~
title: The National School Chaplaincy Program Is an Accident Waiting to Happen
---
Around one in five young Australians suffers from mental illness. These
include anxiety and depressive disorders, as well as complex conditions
like anorexia and bulimia. Some 10 per cent of young Australians suffer
abuse or neglect while one in five has a parent with poor mental health
(21%) or a physical disability (19%).

Young people with mental health issues are at increased risk of dropping
out of school, becoming homeless, or ending up in the justice system.
They are five times as likely to abuse drugs or alcohol (and from there
wind up having unsafe sex, drink-driving or street brawling) and more
likely to self-harm and suicide.

Children’s mental health services are inadequately funded. Much like
adult mental health services, this is not because we lack the money, but
have chosen to spend it on something else.

That something else is school chaplaincy. Last week the Gillard
government pre-empted its own review and increased the program’s funding
by more than a third. The total cost to the taxpayer now stands at $437
million.

You might think a government with $437 million would have an eye to the
pain and suffering caused when youth mental health problems go
untreated. You might think that government would be duty-bound to
provide evidence-based solutions by addressing the woeful shortage of
qualified counselors in schools (in NSW the one to every 1050 students
is more than double the recommended ratio). After all, and quite
literally, the lives of children are at stake.

You might think so, but you’d be wrong. Instead, the Gillard government
has deployed chaplains. School chaplains come from organizations like
Scripture Union Australia which sees them as a means by which they can
fulfil their organizational aim of, “mak[ing] God’s Good News known to
children [and] young people” so “they may come to personal faith in our
Lord Jesus Christ…and become both committed church members.”

The Government knows chaplains are evangelical Christians, not mental
health experts. This is why departmental guidelines prohibit chaplains
from counseling students. They also ban chaplains from providing
educational and medical services, as well as from proselytising. All of
which begs the question: what exactly are we paying chaplains $20,000
each to do?

I’m not the only one wondering. As a report on the program reveals, many
chaplains are unclear about their role. A majority admits they do deal
with student mental health and depression issues, student alcohol and
drug use, physical/emotional abuse and neglect, and suicide and
self-harming behaviours. What most don’t do is refer to appropriate
professionals when out of their depth.

This is not an argument against religion in schools, though one can
clearly be made. Rather it is an argument about wrong choices made for
bad reasons that are putting our most vulnerable schoolchildren at risk.
In a world of scarce resources, money spent on chaplains is money that
could have brought-wait for it-around 5000 qualified counselors into our
schools.

Chaplains are also accidents waiting to happen, which may be why the
Government can’t get far enough away from them when legal liability
issues are mentioned. In various communications, it stresses that
chaplains are not employees of the education department and suggests
that the buck stops with school principals, Chaplaincy Service Providers
or the school P&C.

So what did our children to deserve our negligence? Nothing. It’s just
that Labor needs to pick up an additional 1% of the religious vote in
Queensland.

Sorry kids.