---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2010-12-19
tags: ~
title: What the Lindy Chamberlain, Patsy Ramsey, Kate McCann & now Keli Lane Case
  Says About Us
---
Last week journalist Michael Duffy wrote that there was “a great
disconnect” between “what we know [Keli Lane] did - even putting aside
the murder allegation - and the fact that by literally all public
accounts she was a normal, happy and sociable northern beaches girl with
a supportive and loving family, a passion for sport, and a healthy
social life”.

I disagree that the “great disconnect” is between Lane’s public persona
and her sexual activity, repetitive pregnancies and the use of abortion
and adoption as solutions.

The disconnect is between the contradictory and punitive judgments
Australians pass on women’s sexual and reproductive lives, and our
denial of the corrosive impact these verdicts - and the restrictive laws
that result - have on women’s self-esteem and their capacity to control
their lives.

The moral panic over Lane is familiar. We saw it in the Azaria
Chamberlain, JonBenet Ramsey and Madeleine McCann cases. In each, the
children’s mothers - Lindy, Patsy and Kate - were pilloried for crying
too little or too much, for being manipulative or inscrutable. In each,
media coverage painted the woman as deviant - a bad mother - and so
culpable for her own tragedy. Such a strategy, says Booker prize-winning
novelist Anne Enright, is a “potent form of magic” that calms anxieties
that our own children are at risk.

The coverage of Keli Lane also stereotypes her as a bad and unnatural
woman - sexually rapacious, frivolously social, hyper-ambitious. This
allows us to cast her out, beyond our collective compassion and any need
to hear in her story something painfully revelatory about us, in
particular about the conflicting messages Australian society is sending
to its daughters - that they must be hot but not sluttish, sexually
liberated but reproductively in control, maternally self-abnegating but
highly accomplished.

Lane appeared buffeted by such contradictions. She was terrified of
losing the esteem of friends and family as a “golden girl” but worried -
as she told a friend - that “the only thing [she might really be] good
at [was] being a mum”.

When pregnant, Lane seemed acutely aware of what Dr Susie Allanson, a
psychologist who counsels women with problem pregnancies, calls the
“huge stigma around women becoming pregnant when they haven’t planned
to, embarking on single parenthood, having an abortion or choosing
adoption”. Certainly, the judge had to remind the jury during the trial
that there was no place for moral judgments about Lane’s choice to adopt
or have terminations (she aborted two pregnancies and tried to end a
third but was denied the service because of her gestation). In
correspondence to the worker handling the adoption of her third child,
Lane said: “Society says that this is wrong … that people who do this
must be mad, slutty or cruel.”

I want to be clear here. I am not saying that what appears to be Lane’s
acute vulnerability to the contradictory demands on Australian women
excuses murder.

Instead, my point is to caution against stereotyping and dismissing Lane
to avoid the unflattering truth, not just about the way Tegan’s death
reflects on her but also on us.