---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2010-01-17
title: Do We Really Need to be Polite to the Family Pedophile
---
A reader seeks advice in resolving one of the most distressing dilemmas
ever tackled by this columnist. The mother of two daughters, aged one
and three, habitually finds herself in the holidays in the company of a
child abuser. This, at least, is what she has been told about the
elderly father of her brother’s wife, who arrives each year at Christmas
from interstate.

Despite claiming he abused her sexually over many years as a child, the
sister-in-law maintains a relationship with her father so she and her
kids can have a relationship with her mother, their grandma. Despite
this, our reader says the sister-in-law “will not ever leave her own
children unattended with her father. As soon as my husband and I had
children, she put us on notice about her father’s past behaviour. He has
never been reported or prosecuted.”

The situation has left the reader feeling “hijacked into being friendly
to someone whose past actions I despise” and compromised in her capacity
to ensure her daughters’ safety. What should she do? Put her foot down
and refuse to attend further holiday events, forcing her kids to “miss
out on wonderful times with their cousins and family” or grit her teeth
and continue to watch her daughters like a hawk whenever the man is
near?

Both are morally unsatisfactory options. Why should innocent children be
punished by missing out on family events because of the alleged crimes
of others? Why should their mother have to sacrifice her integrity to
cover up and compensate for a pedophile?

She shouldn’t. Which is why, in the first instance at least, I’d advise
against either and recommend a private chat with the sister-in-law. Not
only might such a conversation provide reassurance about the substance
of the accusations driving this dilemma, it might also allow our reader
to ascertain whether continued silence about the abuse is really what
the sister-in-law wants.

Parents are larger than life to their children. Where abuse was present
but never acknowledged or atoned for, the adult child may still feel
guilt as well as fear of the abuser, despite an intellectual
understanding that they weren’t at fault and that the abuser can’t hurt
them any more.

If this is the case for the sister-in-law, she may want someone to stand
up and speak out. Despite being unable or unwilling to do so herself,
she may yearn for someone else to confront the abuser with the enormity
of his crime and demand he take responsibility for its rippling
consequences.

It is hard to predict the outcome of such a confrontation, which could
be done by post after the man returns home or, failing a satisfactory
response, in person when holiday time rolls around again. A best-case
scenario might see the man apologise and offer to observe restrictions
on his access to children or, perhaps more realistically, to claim
offence and huffily refuse to be in attendance at next year’s events.

Even if it goes badly - with the abuser ignoring letters or making
heated denials in person - it’s hard to see how our reader could be
worse off. Options of self-excluding or grinning-and-bearing would
remain open, though they would be exercised in a more agitated social
context.

But at least her conscience would be clear. Because unlike now she will
know she did all she could to protect her children, and to refuse to
stay silent about a terrible wrong.