---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2010-02-14
tags: ~
title: Pregnancy and Job Seeking. Is it Time to Lie?
---
A reader seeks advice on an acutely female ethical dilemma. She has just
landed a much-wanted interview for a nine-month job, but discovers
herself pregnant. The child, if born, will be her third. If she
miscarries, it will be for the third time, too.

She wants the baby but, because of this history, is loath to reveal her
situation to her prospective employer. She doesn’t even want friends or
family to know, so why should an interview panel be privy to her private
news? And if she cruels her chance of employment by telling, then
miscarries again, she’ll be left with nothing - neither baby nor job.
She’s done this before, withdrawn from a selection process for a
once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, only to lose the pregnancy.

Still she worries about misleading, or worse, being unfair. The law
matters here. Law and ethics are different but practical moral advice
must account for what the law forbids or requires. Although NSW law
allows employers not to hire a woman if she is expecting at the time of
interview, in most cases a refusal to employ a woman because she is
pregnant violates federal anti-discrimination law.

This means that if an employer uses a job seeker’s disclosure of
pregnancy as a reason not to hire her, he is likely to be breaking the
law: something job applicants are under no obligation to facilitate. If
the employer heeds the law and disregards fertility status when making
employment decisions, why should a woman be duty-bound to tell?

But even if the woman is not legally obliged to disclose her pregnancy,
is she morally bound to do so? I think not, for two reasons.

First, because the implications of a positive pregnancy test in the
months after conception are unclear. The one in five Australian
miscarriage rate means that while the result could indicate impending
motherhood, it may not. I ride my bike to work each day; a friend has
high blood pressure. We all present some risk to our employers that we
might fall off our perch. If they need human resources to do the work,
it is a risk they must take.

Second, because if women have a duty to report all would-be pregnancies
to a would-be boss, the workplace discrimination and disadvantage they
already suffer is likely to increase. Why should women be obliged to
increase the challenges they already face - as a result of sexism, and
structural barriers to work-family balance - in landing, keeping and
making headway in a job?

The truth is that most sexually active women aged 13 to 50 are at risk
of being pregnant. If these facts of female fertility, as against the
male sort, are seen as legitimate grounds for employer discrimination
then equal opportunity for women will remain a pipe dream: an ideal to
which we pay lip service but are unwilling to do the hard work to
achieve.

This is not to say that once hired and sure the pregnancy will stick, a
pregnant woman ought not disclose to her employer, and do all she can to
ensure that the requirements of the position are met when she leaves.

It’s easy to mouth platitudes about equal opportunity. Easy to tell our
daughters that they can achieve anything they want in this world. Easy
to assert that a commitment to gender equity is what makes Western
civilisations so different and great.

A dilemma like this puts such sentiments to the test - one woman at a
time.