---
assets: ~
excerpt: 'At a press conference after his resignation, the former NSW Transport Minister
  David Campbell has this to say about revelations he had visited a gay bathhouse:  ’I
  made some personal choices which have put me and my family in this situation…I’ve
  apologised to them for it. I apologise to the community."'
published: 2010-05-27
tags: ~
title: What Public Infidelity Has to do With Me
---
At a press conference after his resignation, the former NSW
Transport Minister David Campbell has this to say about revelations he
had visited a gay bathhouse:

’I made some personal choices which have put me and my family in
this situation…I’ve apologised to them for it. I apologise to the
community."

Campbell’s apology was reminiscent of that made by golfer Tiger Woods in
February. When Wood’s extra-marital affairs were exposed in the media,
he held a press conference to beg forgiveness not just from his wife
Elin, but from everyone else, too:

“I was unfaithful, I had affairs and I cheated…I hurt my wife, my kids,
my mother, my wife’s family, my friends, my foundation and kids all
around the world who admired me…”

Of course, Tiger comes from the land of the prostrate mea culpa. When
South Carolina governor Mark Sanford held a news conference in June last
year to reveal details about his extra-marital affair-the details of
which had been known to his family for months-few were left off the list
of wounded. Sanford begged forgiveness from his wife, his four boys and
the state of South Carolina. “I have been unfaithful to my wife…I hurt
you all. I hurt my wife. I hurt my boys.”

It makes me want to hit someone. An extra-marital affair breaches the
explicit promise most couples make when they wed to be sexually
exclusive. Spouses who’ve been cheated on feel, and have every right to
feel, betrayed and deceived, not just about the affair itself, but the
lying that tends to go on to keep it under wraps.

But what does infidelity in someone else’s marriage have to do with me?
Why does a man I don’t even know, a man who never made any commitments
to me one way or another about the post-marital whereabouts of his
pecker, owe me an explanation, little less a mea culpa, when he sleeps
around? In what way could I have understood his decision to play
professional sport, or to represent me in parliament, as a solemn vow to
me that he’d be faithful to her? Why would I even care?

I do care, of course, but for all the wrong reasons. I care because
other people’s dirty linen is compelling. I care because I am human and
humans are pack animals, forever compelled to see how our own lives
measure up against leading others. I care because I am occasionally
smart enough to want to learn from the mistakes of others, rather than
my own, and in matters of the heart the best way to do this is to stick
my beak in where it doesn’t belong.

But interested or not, it seems far-fetched-preposterous even-to suggest
that who a famous person pokes is my concern. That all high-profile
adulterers owe me the who, what, when and where of all non-missionary
aspects of their sexual activity, not to mention a lavish apology
whenever that behaviour fails to measure up to a set of rigid Christian
standards to which I don’t even subscribe. In what way is my life
altered by Campbell’s, Wood’s or Sanford’s adultery? On the basis of
what promise-implicit or explicit-can I honestly claim that it has
caused me embarrassment, disappointment or hurt?

The stocks and pillory brigade say it’s not about the affair per se, but
what it reveals about the public person’s character or judgment. But
such assertions don’t hold up. Sure, marital infidelity may be
indicative of poor character, but may also prove just the opposite. In a
world with hues other than black and white, David Campbell’s decision to
defer the pursuit of a relationship in which his emotional and sexual
needs might be met in order to maintain his financial and other
commitments to his sick wife and kids could be judged laudible, not
reprehensible.

And while playing around is an undoubtedly high stakes game in a world
where the media knows no bounds or limits, the charge of recklessness
may be an artifact of where the bar’s been set. The failure of some
public figures to measure up to a standard that says they must
demonstrate what conservative Christians would call exemplary behavior
all the time may show they’re recklessness-a minor sin in any event-or
prove only that such expectations are silly or unachievable for members
of an imperfect race.

Second wave feminists understood that the personal was political. Over
the years this key insight has been bastardised in many ways. What was
meant was that to achieve liberation, women must recognise how political
and social circumstances shape their individual experience.

The personal is political was never meant to suggest that every aspect
of a public figure’s life is fair game.