---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2010-11-10
tags: ~
title: Can Doctors Say No to Providing Abortion Care?
---
The religious rights of a small group of medical professionals do not
trump those held by the remainder of the citizenry.

I recently returned to Australia from Seville, where I attended an
international conference on all aspects of abortion care. Among the
issues discussed were the barriers women face to accessing termination
services, even in countries where the procedure is legal.

Foremost among these is refusal by medical practitioners and healthcare
institutions on grounds of religion or conscience. They include
religious doctors as well as public hospitals and clinics operated by
Catholic groups and associations. Abortion is not the only service such
individuals and institutions don’t offer. The list includes birth
control (including emergency contraception for rape victims),
sterilisations, infertility services and comprehensive HIV/Aids
prevention information.

Women suffer profound costs to their health and dignity when the medical
professionals and institutions they are forced to rely on - and whose
salaries and budgets they fund through their taxes - disregard the
informed choices they make about their reproductive healthcare. In
Poland, a woman effectively lost her sight when all three of the doctors
who predicted this outcome refused to grant permission for her to abort.
In Columbia, a 13-year-old rape victim was repeatedly refused an
abortion despite her attempts at suicide when pregnancy and sexually
transmitted infections were diagnosed. Countless women across the world
have had religious doctors deny them accurate results from pre-natal
scans to preclude them having the option of abortion.

Despite the heartless and arrogant nature of such medical practice,
Catholic medical staff and institutions staunchly defend it, and dismiss
the suffering and loss of autonomy women endure as a result. In
Australia, where the state of Victoria recently passed an abortion law
that required refusing doctors to refer and to treat in a
life-threatening emergency, Catholic leaders slammed the new law as the
“nastiest human rights abuse”. A group calling itself Doctors in
Conscience condemned the demand that religious doctors provide an
abortion where their refusal would see a woman die as ushering in “a new
era of healthcare in Australia in which individual health workers and
healthcare organisations can be coerced to act contrary to their
consciences”.

In the same way religious doctors and institutions deny the rights and
duties of medical colleagues whose conscience impels them to support a
woman’s informed medical choice to abort a problem pregnancy. When a
27-year-old mother of four staggered into a Catholic hospital in America
last November, 11 weeks pregnant and gravely ill, the doctors told her
that if she continued with the pregnancy her risk of mortality was
“close to 100%”. But when Sister Margaret McBride authorised the
abortion necessary to save the woman’s life, she was sacked and
excommunicated. The priest heading up the hospital ethics committee
justified this decision with the pronouncement that: “The reason for [an
abortion] never matters.”

Secular moral principles - those to which everyone in society can
subscribe - do not support the unilateral denial by medical
practitioners of particular types of care to certain sorts of patients.
This is for the simple reason that no right, whether legal or moral, is
absolute.

The rights of a religious medical provider to refuse to terminate a
pregnancy must be balanced against the similarly compelling rights of
the patient to follow her conscience in choosing abortion. Medical
practitioners also have an obligation to treat, a duty that in part
flows from the monopoly they exercise over healthcare. Patients,
relatedly, have a right to timely medical care as well as an entitlement
not suffer direct or indirect sex discrimination.

The religious rights of a small group of medical professionals do not
“trump” those held by the remainder of the citizenry. A compromise
between the two is required.

A consensus on the necessary features of such a settlement is now
emerging from statutes and case law in jurisdictions around the world.
So far, what seems to be agreed is that institutions lack consciences.
Only individuals have a right to refuse care on conscience grounds.
Medical staff who are directly involved with the procedure are the only
ones entitled to refuse co-operation on conscience grounds, and such
refusals cannot encompass pre- or post-operative care. Emergency
abortion care must be provided and, in non-urgent cases, medical
professionals must disclose their conscientious objection to the patient
as soon as possible and ensure an effective referral is made.
Institutions and healthcare systems must guarantee the availability of
full-service staff to meet patients’ demand and there must be
consequences for an individual or institution where conscience claims
result in women being denied the care to which they are entitled.

The final feature of emerging conscience law also constitutes my final
ethical point about conscientious action - that it cannot be invoked to
violate the fundamental right of women to lawful healthcare.
Conscientious exemptions to treat are grounded in concerns about dirty
hands and the limited right of an individual, in a society committed to
individual freedom, to avoid direct involvement with something her
conscience or religion forbids. Deploying conscience claims as a means
to deny women’s access to lawful services, however, lacks all moral
legitimacy.

This is not to say that morality precludes medical objectors from moving
beyond the avoidance of doing wrong themselves to acting to stop what
they believe is wrong all together. Rather it is to remind them that
such behaviour is called civil disobedience - not conscientious
objection - and requires far more sacrifice from them (including a
willingness to go to prison) to be worthy of respect.