---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2010-11-29
title: "Why Negative Ads Donâ\x80\x99t Work, but Sticking to Principle Does"
---
It all comes down to Bentleigh, a Liberal strategist told me on Saturday
night.

He was close to swaying from exhaustion and the release of tightly
coiled stress. Or near-release, as the outcome was not yet decided.

It still isn’t. Counting will continue today, but so far the Libs are
423 votes ahead.

So what lessons can be drawn from the cliffhanger result, and a likely
Lib/Nats victory? Early chatter from the commentariat has focused on the
giant-slayer achievements of Baillieu and his team.

Brumby’s strategy has come under the microscope, and some have trumpeted
the end of the Greens in the wake of the party’s failure to make any
gains in the lower house.

Take a step back, however, and a different picture emerges, one that
points to the importance of ethics in modern election campaigns and the
governments that result.

While Baillieu’s achievements in winning so many seats in one blow are
indisputable, the result is a Parliament split right up the middle.

Victorians seem to have chosen a chamber where the centre-left and
centre-right parties are more or less equally represented.

While it’s far too early to call results in the upper house, one
scenario is that the Greens retain the balance of power, another that
the Coalition will hold it by one. Again, this suggests that a moderate
and consultative approach to policy and process by the party that forms
government would be both fair and wise.

Electors don’t like negative ads but campaign strategists insist they
work. But the failure of a final week TV blitz - reviving Labor’s
long-time criticism of Baillieu’s business interests - to impress
swinging marginal seat voters has turned this political wisdom on its
head.

These voters may also have been impressed by Baillieu’s decision to
eschew clever election tactics and simply refuse to preference the party
of the left - the Greens - on principle. This suggests that the rise of
“values voters”, usually discussed in relation to the Greens may be a
broader phenomenon.

This is not surprising. While electors in state polls may be mainly
concerned with matters pragmatic and economic, they know that whatever a
party’s policy and promises, they must be delivered by flesh-and-blood
humans.

This means that despite the well-known cynicism of Australians about all
parliamentarians, voters must place some trust that they will do as they
say.

Of course, trustworthiness may just be one facet of a politician’s moral
character that voters consider. Lightning can strike when voter
judgments about moral character dovetail or conflict with other campaign
messages and tactics. This may be what happened in Victoria.

Labor’s negative campaign blitz reinforced voter perceptions that Brumby
was more arrogant and less trustworthy than his opponent. My own
suspicion is the previous relationship between the two men - they were
in the same class at school - saw such tactics play particularly badly.

In contrast, Baillieu’s decision, against conflicting internal advice,
not to preference the Greens undercut the view of some electors that he
was “weak” or “stood for nothing.”