---
assets: ~
excerpt: |-
  *How can human attributes be deemed corporate property?*

  We tend to think of patents as good, or at least necessary, legal
  tools. Patents provide legal protection for innovations on which
  inventors rely to recoup the investment of time and money they made to
  develop a new medication, or bring a product to market.
link: ''
published: 2010-04-27
tag: writings
title: "Patently Absurd. Why Corporates Shouldnâ\x80\x99t Profit From Our Genes"
---
*How can human attributes be deemed corporate property?*

We tend to think of patents as good, or at least necessary, legal
tools. Patents provide legal protection for innovations on which
inventors rely to recoup the investment of time and money they made to
develop a new medication, or bring a product to market.

But where wrongly applied, patents can stifle innovation, drive up costs
and restrict access to medicines and diagnostic tests. They can put
lives at risk.

Patents on genes do just that, yet the Australian government continues
to grant them every year. To date, about 15,000 patents on human genes
have been granted around the world, including genes linked to cystic
fibrosis, hearing loss, hereditary haemochromatosis, long QT syndrome,
Tay-Sachs and Alzheimer’s disease.

Among the most high-profile victims of inappropriate patents are women
at risk, or suffering from, hereditary breast or ovarian cancer. Myriad
Genetics has patents on two of the genes that predict such cancers.
Their proprietary control means scientists must seek Myriad’s permission
to use the genes in studies designed to understand the cancers and to
develop effective cures. Myriad has also used its monopolistic control
to prevent women getting tested, to find out whether they carry the
gene, in non-Myriad laboratories.

In America, this meant that sick women could either pay the company’s
exorbitantly high fee for the test or go without.

In Australia, with our public health system, such extortionist tactics
target the taxpayer. When Amgen had its 20-year patents on anaemia
treatment erythropoietin (EPO) extended by the Australian patent office
a few years back, $250 million was added to the public health bill. At
least the treatment remains available.

At the Westmead Children’s Hospital in Sydney, doctors are prohibited by
a patent on the SCN1A gene from testing infants for epilepsy. This is
despite the fact that those babies’ parents, and all other taxpayers,
funded the research that identified the gene in the first place.

Americans have had enough. In a landmark decision last month, a New York
court ruled that patents for the genes associated with hereditary breast
and ovarian cancer should never have been granted. The judge ruled that
genes are products of nature, not innovations that can or should be made
corporate property. Genes are part of all our bodies, the court noted,
containing fundamental information about human life and health that
should be available to everyone, not locked up by private companies for
profit.

While Myriad intends to challenge the ruling in a case that seems
destined for the US Supreme Court, for the moment the Federal Court
judgment is the law of the land. Until further notice, the US patent
office will not grant any further patents on human genes isolated from
the body, while those granted to date are now in jeopardy.

Australians are not so lucky, or at least not yet. The Senate recently
concluded a public consultation about the appropriate role of patents in
regulating gene technology, but has yet to make recommendations. The
inquiry looked at the impact of patents on the provision and costs of
healthcare, the training of healthcare providers, the progress of
medical research and the “health and wellbeing of the Australian
people”.

Its findings have been delayed due to the “complex nature of many issues
associated with this inquiry” (and, it is rumoured, the well-funded and
vociferous lobbying efforts of biotechnology companies).

Australian legislators must also now be attentive to the US court
decision, as US and Australian patent laws are kissing cousins. This
means that while the American decision is not binding on Australian
courts, it should have persuasive effect.

Australian supporters of present legal arrangements say that without
patents, medical innovation will stop. Why should companies invest in
research from which they cannot profit?

In a recent article in , Joseph Stiglitz and John Sulston - Nobel prize
winners in economics and medicine, respectively - argue that for science
to progress, and medical care to improve, the knowledge derived from
genes must remain in the public domain, not locked up by patents. “As we
move into an era where the sequencing of all of an individual’s genes is
common and necessary for personalised medicine, free sharing of
information about genes will be vital … to translate this information
into medical advancements,” they wrote.

Genes are part of our bodies. The understanding derived from them -
knowledge critical to understanding and curing disease - is the
birthright of all humanity, not the private property of a corporation.
If we want knowledge about human nature and human health to flourish, we
must ensure it is available to and for us all.