---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2010-05-16
title: "Why Weâ\x80\x99ve Stopped Trusting Science"
---
The 1950s was the apex of scientists and scientific credibility. My
parents, like most of their peers, were taken in by heroic media
depictions of Jonas Salk, inventor of the polio vaccine, and the
outpouring of scientific ingenuity in the cold war race to the moon.
Like many of the children of this doctor-knows best generation, I was
formula-fed, fully vaccinated and dosed with antibiotics at the first
sign of sore throat.

Only one of these health prescriptions-vaccination-is alive and well
today, though recent claims by Jim Carey’s wife Jenny McCarthy on Oprah
that vaccination caused her son’s autism have some parents running
scared. At the same time, Australia’s efforts to halt climate change
have ground to a halt. In the wake of errors in the report by
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and the ‘climategate’ email
row-which saw British scientists accused of massaging climate data to
disguise falling temperatures-public distrust of climate science is at
an all time high. Such scares and scandals, writes Hannah Devlin in the
Times Online, have “worrying implications… for the integrity of
scientific research…and for the credibility of the scientific method”.

The scientific method provides a way of knowing that, like democracy,
may be the worst way of knowing things, except for all those other ways
that have been tried. Scientists are people who know how to use the
method, and understand that only those claims that survive it can be
called “facts” or “true.” The rest is just conjecture. If we want the
most reliable facts available about the world available, science is our
method, and scientists the go-to boys and girls.

But we don’t trust science-and revere scientific authorities-like we
once did, who is to blame? The bone is usually pointed at the media,
which does bear some responsibility for the problem. This is seen most
clearly in the climate change debate, where the standing given to the
contrary position of denialists gives them credibility that as mostly
non-scientists, they haven’t earned.

Climate change deniers are largely funded by conservative think-tanks
that are, in turn, backed by some of the biggest and wealthiest
carbon-emitting corporates on the planet. In one study, 78 per cent of
books denying the reality of climate change or the need to act on it
were linked to conservative think tanks. Few of these authors had a PhD,
even from less-than-relevant scientific disciplines like biology.

Despite this, the “balance” requirement sees climate change deniers
regularly trotted out and given equal standing on the podium with
scientists with relevant expertise, or allowed to fly solo in extended
media interviews. When Lord Christopher Mockton, the 3rd Viscount
Monckton of Brenchley, British business consultant, policy adviser,
writer, columnist, puzzle inventor and climate change denier was in
Australia recently, he appeared in the media 455 times. In contrast,
when scientist James Hansen touched down at about the same time-Hansen
heads NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies and is an adjunct
professor in the Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences at
Columbia University-he gained only 61 media mentions.

But the power of capitalist marketing and longstanding media modus
operandi are not solely to blame. Scientific researchers, the businesses
that commercialise and market their work and those who barrack
uncritically for them from the sidelines, also bear some responsibility
for declining levels of public trust in science. Vaccination is a
classic case. Public health programs to support childhood immunisation
rely on public trust that the jabs children are getting are both safe
and effective. The health bureaucracy, medical doctors and
community-based organizations vigorously promote vaccination as part of
what they see as their broader remit to lionise evidence-based medicine
over unproven cures.

All well and good, except when real problems arise with vaccination, and
such groups go to ground. Just last month, the Australian government was
forced to suspend the national flu vaccination program for children
under five after adverse reactions by hundreds of children around the
nation, some requiring hospitalization. Media reports soon raised the
possibility that a “too cosy” relationship between the vaccine
manufacturer and the government may have corrupted decisions about its
use, and that parents had been told to give it to their kids before
adequate safety and efficacy testing and a proper risk/benefit analysis
had been done.

For example, Professor Peter Collignon, an infectious diseases expert
from the Australian National University, told the ABC that before
vaccines were approved and recommended for use by government, better
studies and risk/benefit analyses were needed. “Before we roll out a
vaccine to millions of people…we need to do studies of thousands of
people over a period of time to make sure we are always going to do more
good than harm with the vaccine…[Currently we don’t have] enough data to
know how effective [the vaccine is] going to be.”

In the wake of the problem, and issues arising at around the same time
with a childhood pneumococcal vaccination, researchers at the Telethon
Institute for Child Health have made urgent calls for a whole-of-life
immunization register to help evaluate the safety and effectiveness of
vaccination programs.

Such claims would no doubt be shocking to many Australians, who may have
assumed that those who tout the importance of evidence, actually
practice what they preach. Australians who might have assumed that the
medical interventions their government pays for and their doctors
promote are supported by a rigorous and fulsome evidence-based:
otherwise why would they support them? That these assumptions may be
false can, and should be expected, to have a predictable effect-the
undermining of trust in science.

We will never go back to the days when science was the new religion, and
men in white coats were expected to cure all the ills of the world. Nor
should we. Reverence for authority should always be tempered, and no
institution or profession mucking about in the real world can remain on
a pedestal long. But by claiming the respect they deserve, and striving
to ensure they deserve it, science may be able to get the public trust
it needs to survive and prosper back.