---
assets: ~
published: 2010-04-11
tags: ~
title: Get Religion out of Government Schools, Please!
---
A mother writes to me, torn with guilt about a decision she made about
the education of her daughter, who began kindergarten this year. The
family doesn’t believe in “structured religion”, preferring instead to
raise their children as “tolerant of all religions but followers of
none”.

For this reason, she refused her child’s participation in scripture
instruction offered by the school.

But the five-year-old was the only child in her year to be excused from
the lesson and so was forced to sit alone outside the classroom while it
proceeded. The little girl was so distressed that her mother - let’s
call her Karen - reluctantly gave permission for her to attend Anglican
scripture. But the decision doesn’t feel right and she’s still not sure
that it is. What should she do?

I’m not sure what part of this dilemma astounded or offended me more.
That in 2010 supposedly secular schools are teaching religion or that
parents who see such tutelage as inappropriate or inconsistent with
their personal values or minority religion beliefs must choose between
raising their kids as they see fit or being party to their symbolic
casting out.

At first I thought this story, however sad, must be one out of the box.
A one-off predicament that bore no relationship to the parenting
experience of the divinely challenged raising kids in NSW. But I was
wrong. The basic elements of Karen’s story, and the ethical dilemma to
which they give rise, is one facing about one in four families with
school-age kids (the Education Department does not keep statistics on
the exact number of kids who refuse religious education).

Some of these parents tell their stories on a Facebook site dedicated to
the issue, revealing heartbreaking tales of primary-age children forced
to sit alone in a photocopying room while the rest of the class learned
religion, or of being denied the right to undertake even the most
innocuous time-killing activities - like knitting - when religious
parents complained to the school that their kids were coming home with
pleas to escape scripture so they could do the same.

The origins of the problem date back to the 1800s, when the newly
emergent state government brokered a deal with the churches. In exchange
for loosening the stranglehold Christians had on education services, the
provider - the state - would dedicate an hour for religious studies each
week.

Religious groups could choose a member of the clergy or any instructor
they liked to teach children, well, anything they wished. Such as God
made Adam and Eve and all the world. Or that Jesus put mud in someone’s
eye and that man could see again.

While the Education Act of 1990 gave parents the right to opt out for
their children, it prohibited such students being offered timetabled
lessons or scheduled school activities.

So where does this Faustian pact leave parents like Karen? Between a
rock and a hard place, which is why I have no problem with them making
whatever short-term decision they feel necessary to protect their
children’s psychological and emotional health. Children should never be
sacrificed on the altar of their parents’ principles.

But in the long-term Karen, and others like her, must fight. Beat on the
door of the Education Minister until she amends the department’s policy
that prescribes suitable alternatives being provided for kids whose
parents say no to scripture. So that no parent, or child, has to endure
what they’ve had to again.