---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2010-10-10
tag: writings
title: Talking About Rape
---
It’s the end of the footy season, so everyone’s talking about rape. Or,
more specifically, about the young women who were so stupid as to put
themselves in a position where they’d be raped, or be able to claim
later that they were.

TV presenter Kerri-Anne Kennerley laid the blame on the “strays” who
“throw . . . themselves at sportspeople”. “What do [women] expect,” she
asked, “when they are out at night?”

Former AFL player Spida Everitt was also scathing about, “Yet another .
. . girl making alleged allegations after she awoke with . . . an
alleged guilty conscience.”

I have been raped. Twice. The first time was my first time - I was 17 -
but I didn’t think of it as rape. Not even when the nightmares began
and, following that, the depression.

I just thought I was a stupid girl who put myself in harm’s way and got
what I deserved. Embarrassed at being so dumb, I told no one what
happened. It was only years later when I stubbed my toe and couldn’t
stop crying that my mother strong-armed me into seeing a psychologist
and the story came out.

The second time was when an old boyfriend got my half-asleep roommate to
let him into the house in the middle of the night. I was in my room and
woke having sex. Surely this was a clear-cut case of rape but, again, I
didn’t see it that way. Because now I was 21 and understood that you
can’t thread a moving needle and I’d had sex with him before so what was
the big deal and if I hadn’t wanted it why didn’t I scream?

In fact, what I did - then and later - was pretend everything was fine.
I acted like what happened was exactly what I chose to happen. I was not
prepared to contemplate the alternative framing of events and its
emotional corollary - that I’d been raped again and this meant that I
wasn’t safe anywhere, not even in my own bed.

I don’t want pity. Indeed, it’s fear of being seen as a victim that has
led me to keep my personal story quiet thus far. I tell it now to try to
inject the complex reality of sexual assault - how it happens and how
those who experience it attempt to get their heads around it - into the
public discussions we have most years at this time on the subject.

I also want to point to the contribution gender stereotypes make to the
problem. Like young women today, I was sold a double message. The
explicit one was that I was strong, capable and free to do what I chose
with my life and body - sexually and otherwise - and not be judged for
it.

The subterranean one was that if I acted as if I was entitled to be both
free and safe, and someone did hurt or rape me, it was my own stupid,
sluttish fault.

These contradictory messages have co-existed quietly in my psyche just
as they do for some young women today until the Kennerleys and Everitts
of the world lay them bare.

I laid my own demons to rest long ago. One thing that helped was the
acknowledgment by one of the men that something bad had happened and it
wasn’t my fault. This was several years later and we were at a party. He
found me alone on the balcony and said this: “What happened . . . that
night. I didn’t realise then but I do now. It wasn’t right. I shouldn’t
have done it.” I forgave him right then and there.

So where to now? Has increasing social and sexual freedom been good for
young women, or bad? The truth is that this is the wrong question to
ask. Equality and freedom are chances that some women will use poorly
and others well. Certainly every young woman, like every young man, will
make mistakes and get hurt. This is what coming of age is all about. The
hope is that as time moves on, and a critical number of generations
accumulate wisdom they can pass to their kids, the relative balance of
those who use their freedom wisely will grow.

For thousands of years, humans have lived in societies built on the
exercise of superior male strength and the inevitability of female
pregnancy. Inflexible and gender-inequitable rules for emotional and
physical engagement between the sexes arose from these realities.

As societies governed by the rule of law and populated by women with
access to reliable contraception become the norm, new rules of
engagement for relations between the sexes - ones based on mutual
understanding, respect and consent - will flourish.

There is no doubt that young men are changing. Many see women as their
equals, are well across the concept of consent and - in response to the
more assertive sexuality of their female peers - are interrogating the
“real men always want it” stereotype as a first step towards a “no means
no” mantra of their own.

Similarly, we must recognise young women who report sexual assault as
canaries in the coalmine. It is they who are blazing the trail towards
the safe and equal world we want for our daughters and sons. This is
because, unlike me at that age, they don’t have the words of Kennerley
or Everitt in their head.

Instead, they believe that, just like their male mates, they should be
free to party with abandon when their team wins the grand final. And be
safe while they do it.