---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2010-10-24
title: Flu Jabs - Australia Needs to Do Better
---
A report into what went wrong with this year’s seasonal flu vaccine for
kids deserves our attention. The West Australian Health Department’s
Ministerial Review into the Public Health Response into the Adverse
Events to the Seasonal Influenza Vaccine sought to uncover the reason
for “an alarming rise in adverse events following immunisation” that
included vomiting, diarrhoea and febrile convulsions. Four weeks after
the vaccination program began, Australia’s chief medical officer advised
doctors across the country to stop giving the shot to children under
five.

We still do not know what caused the estimated 800 per cent increase in
the number of febrile convulsions experienced by children who got the
jab this year. But the review does shed light on other aspects of the
health scare.

First, it reveals an adverse event reporting system that is cumbersome
and grossly unequal to its task of early detection of problems. There is
no single agency responsible for monitoring and neither of those
involved - including the Therapeutic Goods Administration - make it easy
for parents and GPs to log adverse events. Existing methods of compiling
and analysing various floaty bits of paper are slow and inefficient.

Add to this the inability to ascertain the total number of injections
given - the all important denominator figure essential to knowing
whether the reported number of adverse events is higher than expected -
and you have a system the report describes as neither “robust or
timely”.

It also fails to conform to World Health Organisation recommendations on
mass immunisation programs. Each year Australia has only a short period
to develop and test the seasonal influenza vaccine before it must be
approved and manufactured. This means clinical trials are limited and
that - to quote the WHO - “further testing of safety and effectiveness
will need to take place after administration of the vaccine has begun”.

To achieve this, countries must implement post-vaccine surveillance
systems that monitor the product for safety and efficacy. However,
Australia’s doesn’t. Not only are our usual monitoring systems plagued
by structural deficiencies but we also failed to keep in place the
monitoring the WHO recommended for the swine flu pandemic shots.

This was particularly unfortunate, the review notes, given that the 2010
immunisation was “significantly different” to previous seasonal flu
vaccinations and the program involved very young children.

Needless to say, parents knew none of this. They thought their
government wouldn’t give vaccines to young children that had not been
adequately tested. When their children were injured, some began
researching the vaccine and discovered their faith was misplaced. The
experience not only damaged trust in vaccination programs but the public
health system more generally.

So where to now? For a start, every one of the review’s recommendations
should be implemented. If time constraints associated with getting flu
immunisations to market mean safety and efficacy tests must continue
after vaccine administration starts, it is imperative our post-vaccine
surveillance systems provide rigorous, efficient, online and real-time
monitoring of the number and type of adverse events in relation to the
overall number of doses given. It is also vital for parents to be
adequately informed about the testing and safety of flu immunisation.

What happened this year was not good enough. Not at all.