---
assets: ~
published: 2010-02-28
tags: ~
title: Support for Dying Friend our Final Gift
---
A READER - a qualified scientist I’ll call Ron - asks for my view on a
dilemma that pitted his personal and professional integrity, and belief
in absolute truths, against his love for a dying friend.

Ron’s friend, also a scientist, was dying of cancer. “He said that he
would never use magic bullets,” Ron says, “but after two years of great
pain he turned to … a [medical] device I knew … was a blatant scam.”

Should Ron have been honest and told his friend what he thought about
his medical choices, or supported his friend in the choices he made,
whatever Ron thought of them? Ron chose to keep his mouth shut. His
friend died some months later. Now, he wonders, did he do the right
thing?

I think so. What really mattered in this situation was that Ron kept
faith with the requirements of being a friend, not with his beliefs
about the importance of medical interventions having a base in evidence.
His friend was terminally ill and the Western medical kit bag was
clearly empty so whatever he chose to do or not do was not likely to
substantially alter the final result.

People at the end stage of a terminal illness have two options. One is
to put their affairs in order and live their life to the fullest, in
full knowledge that death is imminent. The other is to fight, not
necessarily in the belief they can win, but to assert control by
resisting the unwanted end.

In Helen Garner’s novel *The Spare Room*, the dying Nicola injects
massive doses of vitamin C, then tosses off the pain and noxious side
effects as evidence the intervention is “savaging the tumours and
driving them out”. Nicola’s friend, Helen, rails at Nicola’s naivety.
“Their treatments are bullshit, Nicola. They’re ripping you off. They
can’t cure cancer.”

But the truth is that what frightens and enrages Helen is not Nicola’s
non-evidence-based approach to medicine. It’s her friend’s refusal to
accept her own death. “You’re using that bloody clinic to distract
yourself,” Helen tells Nicola.\
“Don’t say it, Hel,” says Nicola. She raises one palm. “Don’t tell me.”
But Helen won’t be stopped. “You’ve got to get ready.”

It is easier for those of us who love and care for the terminally ill to
witness their smooth transition through the Kubler-Ross stages of dying:
denial, anger, bargaining, depression and acceptance. We sleep better
knowing that as their time approached, our friend or family member was
“ready” and “at peace”.

The truth is that not everyone does dying the same way. Some will never
come to acceptance. They will “go on fighting right to their last
breath”, explains the nurse who comes to look after Nicola. “And it is
one way of doing it.”

For Helen, it was recognising that it was not the idiotic fruitlessness
of Nicola’s vitamin C detox that was distressing and enraging her. It
was Nicola’s inability to “work towards a glorious moment of
enlightenment” and to admit she was dying and, by so doing, allow Helen
and others who loved her to accept and be open about it, too.

However painful we find it, supporting our friends to die as they see
fit can be our final gift to them. Biting his tongue, as Ron did about
the sham nature of his friend’s last-ditch medical efforts, didn’t
compromise Ron’s integrity. It gave his friend permission to die
fighting and was the act of a true friend.