---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2010-11-20
tags: ~
title: Small-L Liberals Skewer Progressives on Horns of a Dilemma
---
Should progressive voters act to ensure the right side of politics is
liberal, not conservative?

In the wake of the chess-like analysis of the Victorian Liberals’
decision to preference Labor before the Greens in next Saturday’s state
election, Victorians voters must now confront their own tactical
conundrum. In particular, the quandary facing those who take a
progressive line on issues such as abortion, physician-assisted dying,
stem cell research, artistic censorship and multiculturalism.

Such voters face a hard choice. They can vote for Ted Baillieu, who is
progressive on all these issues, or, by not doing so, risk confining him
and his small-l brand of liberalism to history’s dustbin.

Advertisement: Story continues below\
Members of the Liberal Party share a radically individualistic, socially
conservative economic agenda. But, just like Labor, they splinter on
issues of individual rights, equality and the role religious beliefs
should have in shaping the laws that govern us.

The fall of federal Liberal leader Malcolm Turnbull to the sword of a
man colleagues have dubbed Captain Catholic has arguably left Baillieu
the last small-l Liberal leader across the nation. If he loses next
weekend, it won’t just finish him as Leader of the Opposition but may
also spell the end of small-l liberalism in Australia.

Who cares? To quote a tweet from feminist cartoonist Judy Horacek, many
of the progressive voters who share Baillieu’s stance on matters of
individual freedom, equality, diversity and the secular state would “no
more vote Liberal than fly”. Why should they care who leads the party,
now or in the future, or whether liberal or conservative brands of
Liberals are elected to Parliament?

Well, they should care for the simple reason that the stance of the
Liberals determines the tone, tenor and parameters of debate on
progressive issues. Where numbers are tight or a conscience vote will
determine the outcome, the number of small-l Liberal votes in the
chamber will determine whether progressive policy falters or thrives.

A progressive stance from the Liberals enhances the power of the
progressive wing of the Labor Party while a conservative opposition
emboldens its conservative religionists to frustrate change and advance
their illiberal agenda.

The abortion debate in the state in 2008 is a case in point. As former
Victorian premier Joan Kirner has acknowledged, Baillieu played an
important role in the success of the decriminalisation push. He made his
intention to vote for reform early in the piece, and each time
conservative religious Liberals sought to derail the process, he put
them in their place. When Peter Costello tried to stir up community
disquiet about the legislation, Baillieu did what is all to too rare in
the male-dominated world of politics: he kept faith with his small-l
Liberal principles even when it came to women. He told The Age that
women deserved to be free to choose to have an abortion “without fear of
unwarranted persecution, prosecution or stigma”, and added: “It’s time
to provide some certainty, and for the women of Victoria this is a very
important [time].”

One has only to look at the inaction on law reform in Queensland and New
South Wales - states lumbered with the same antiquated and unclear
criminal provisions on abortion that reigned in Victoria - to recognise
the key role of a small-l Liberal opposition.

Even in Queensland, where last month a young woman and her boyfriend
were charged and tried for the crime of abortion (a jury found them not
guilty), there is no political will to repeal criminal provisions that
hark back to 1861. The reason? In Queensland, the Liberals, in coalition
with the Nationals, have a highly religious conservative bent and have
joined forces with those of similar persuasion in Queensland Labor to
stymie change.

Baillieu is not progressive on every issue (although it’s easy for him
to appear this way when his federal counterparts continue to move - to
quote former prime minister Malcolm Fraser - “further and further to the
right”). He is against gay marriage, a stance that undercuts his usual
commitment to equity and diversity. But John Brumby opposes gay
marriage, too. Unlike the Premier, Baillieu supports physician-assisted
dying, an issue likely to occupy the attention of the new Victorian
Parliament if the Greens have their way.

So where does that leave Victorians who want to act in a principled
fashion, but also tactically and with an eye to the future, when casting
their vote?

I think anyone who wants Victoria to remain the most sane and
forward-looking state in the nation, anyone who wants the Liberal Party
to remain a party of liberalism - not religious conservatism - has to
look hard at Baillieu’s Liberals this time around because the stark
truth is that unless a small-l Liberal opposition can win its way
through to government - and soon - there won’t be any small-l Liberals
left.