---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2011-02-27
title: "Why Women Donâ\x80\x99t Always Support Other Women"
---
A few months back I was a guest on a morning talk show. “Dr Cannold,”
one of the hosts asked, “Why is it that older women often don’t support
younger ones?”

I cleared my throat but was cut short. We were out of time. Later,
however, my inbox and Twitter feed confirmed what I already knew. Women
are desperately interested in the answer to this question and a related
one, “Why do women join anti-women causes?”

Here are my thoughts.

Older women can be nasty to younger women because they’re jealous. Youth
equates to fertility and sometimes to beauty. In a man’s world both
confer power. Never mind that younger women may be unaware of this power
or unwilling to use it (often and ironically because they have listened
when their female elders advised against it). The bald facts are that
younger women have power that the uncompromising gavel of time has
pronounced inaccessible to older women. In a world that limits women’s
access to other routes of influence over their own destiny, this loss
hurts.

Older women can be less willing mentors than older men. Take a look
around and the reasons for this become clear. To give those scrambling
up behind you a helping hand, you need to be well ahead of them and have
a firm grip. But the higher up you go in the media, government,
entertainment or corporate worlds, the fewer women you’ll find. In 2010,
for example, 2.5 per cent of ASX 200 chairmen and 3 per cent of chief
executives were women. Just 30 per cent of parliamentarians are female
and far fewer of these have safe seats or ministerial posts.

Some women who have managed to scrape their way to the top don’t feel
secure enough for generosity. They’ve done the sums and, in contrast to
their male counterparts, they know they’re competing with junior women
for the scarce, even token, spots allocated for females.

The generation gap is not the only one that divides women. What about
women-led social movements with anti-women agendas? Whether it’s
fundamentalist religious movements striving to return pregnant and
economically dependent women to the home, or political parties dedicated
to cutting funding to child care and food aid for the children of the
mostly female poor, women can be well-represented among those driving
and supporting laws that deny their own sex autonomy and dignity.

Perhaps they are in denial. To work towards advancing the interests of
her sex, a woman must admit that sexism exists and is crimping her own
life chances. Some women are loath to do this, especially when the only
sensible corrective is to steal time from the pursuit of her personal
ambitions to assume the gargantuan task of changing the world.

While not admirable, I can understand the woman who wishes so hard that
she had the freedom to simply get on with living her life in the same
way she can see her male siblings and friends doing that she convinces
herself that she does.

As a repentant young woman recently explained of her former pro-life
stance, “Because I was saving myself for marriage . . . I knew that I
would . . . never be a murderer like those sluts.” Insisting one is
different, special and more virtuous than other women - and so not in
need of the social salves they seek - is the act of a fragile ego. But
it also speaks poignant volumes about the yearning all humans have to
duck obstacles of bias and discrimination and gain a respected place in
society on their own steam.