---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2011-03-13
title: We Can Only Wish Teen at Heart of Dikileaks Scandal Our Best
---
We are now entering the second year of the DikiLeaks scandal. The story
began in February last year when St Kilda AFL player Sam Gilbert and
other players attended a school clinic in Melbourne where they met a
16-year-old student. A month later, in another city while competing in
an athletics competition, the girl hooked up with the players at a
hotel. She had sex with one player and soon became Gilbert’s girlfriend.

In May the teen told her school principal that she was pregnant with
twins by Gilbert. He reported it but by the end of the month both the
AFL and police investigations concluded that no inappropriate or illegal
activity occurred.

In September the teen began meeting agent Ricky Nixon at his office.
About this time the girl began spruiking the nude photos of St Kilda
players but, finding no takers, uploaded the images to Facebook. Gilbert
launched a lawsuit and St Kilda vice-president Ross Levin vowed to make
her pay.

After a text message correspondence Nixon visited the teen in a city
hotel. She alleged drug-taking and an affair. A QC investigation was
begun but the findings were pre-empted by Nixon’s admission of a
substance abuse problem and his recent decision to step down.

Some good-hearted commentators have been worrying about the girl, who
they see as a vulnerable child unable to make informed and voluntary
choices. They assume her actions to date have been mistakes and express
dread about “permanent consequences”.

Part of their worry is the intersection of the age-old tale of
boy-humiliates-girl, girl-goes-for-jugular, with new media platforms
that reveal, amplify and archive every indiscretion. I worry, too, but
also wonder whether based on the evidence to date, might we be
catastrophising a bit? Could sexist ideas about reputation and
risk-taking be clouding our judgment?

The teen does appear to have been victimized by several men in positions
of authority, but she’s also claimed some scalps. While vengeance is
never edifying, it occupies a prominent place in the moral landscape of
most teens, offering a means to overcome humiliation and save face. On a
scorecard of her own making, she’s arguably one up.

Yes, this girl is taking risks - lots of them. Worse, she’s doing it in
a world changing so fast that the full dimensions of a worst-case
outcome can’t really be fully assessed.

But teens have always been risk-takers and society always less forgiving
of the risks young women tend to take (often with sex, risking unwanted
pregnancy, sexual assault) compared with those taken by young men
(drinking too much, driving too fast).

Interestingly, just as more young women embrace “male” risks, social
tolerance for such risk-taking is declining. That’s OK, but we need to
be gender-equitable in our opprobrium, and realistic about the capacity
of the adolescent brain to make the assessments fundamental to prudent
choice.

This is the precise point of the worriers. But the truth is that the law
deems most seventeen year olds competent to authorize their own medical
treatment because they have the ability to understand that there is a
choice, and that all choices have consequences. From that we might
conclude she’s like mature enough to make choices and wear
responsibility for them in other areas of life, too.

The St Kilda teen has flown the nest. I wish her the best.