---
assets: ~
published: 2011-03-23 12:12:08
tags: ~
title: "Note to the PM: Politics Donâ\x80\x99t Belong in Medicine"
---
For those who have been watching the debate about RU486, this
coming Tuesday is the moment of truth. That’s because Tuesday is the day
the Coalition party room meets to discuss whether they will support or
oppose a promised Democrat’s amendment to the Therapeutic Goods Act that
will lift what has effectively been a ban on the “abortion pill” in
Australia.

The Prime Minister has hinted that he will offer his colleagues a
conscience vote on the issue. This is the route Federal Labour has
already adopted to deal with longstanding and trenchant internal
divisions in the party around women’s reproductive freedom.

But a conscience vote sends all the wrong messages to Parliamentarians
and to the electorate about the nature of the vote on RU 486. It asserts
that the vote is about the moral or legal legitimacy of abortion. Yet
this could not be further from the truth. In reality, this is a vote
about the integrity of Australia’s framework for ensuing the quality,
safety and efficacy of the medicines we ingest and give to our children.
It is a vote about whether or not the TGA, or the Health Minister, ought
to be making critical decision about which pharmaceuticals are made
available to Australian patients, and in what circumstances.

To understand why, a short history of the offending amendments is
necessary. Passed in 1996 with the agreement of both major parties, the
amendments were designed by their author - anti-choice Senator Harradine
- to forever deny Australian women access to RU 486 and any other
pharmaceutical capable of inducing a non-surgical abortion. Having made
the specious claim that the rigorous quality, safety and efficacy
analysis the TGA does for all pharmaceuticals entering Australia was
inadequate for these drugs - and these drugs alone - the Harradine
amendments require the Health Minister to approve in writing the
importation, trial, registration or listing of such drugs, and to table
that approval in parliament. In exchange for this warped
dream-come-true, Senator Harradine horse-traded his vote to privatise
Telstra.

Of course, the drover’s dog could work out that the Harradine amendments
virtually guaranteed that no company would attempt to market the drug in
Australia. Registering drugs with the TGA is time-consuming and
expensive. No manufacturer with any sense would bankroll it knowing that
even if they successfully demonstrate that the drug is both safe and
effective the Health Minister could still - without even needing to
explain why - refuse to permit Australian patients to access it.

The contempt both political parties showed for Australian women and
patients in passing the Harradine amendments - and continue to
demonstrate by refusing to join hands to remove them - is breathtaking.
RU486 is used in the treatment of life-threatening conditions like
Cushings Syndrome, inoperable brain tumours, HIV/AIDS, ovarian and some
breast cancers. Yet, by and large, Australians with such
life-threatening conditions miss out or are forced to cope with
intolerable delays. The hypocrisy of anti-choice players in this drama
also deserves mention. Mifepristone enables women to abort very early in
pregnancy - indeed, the moment they know they are pregnant while six
weeks is the earliest a woman can have a surgical abortion. However,
despite opponents of choice expressing particular concern about the
“tragedy” of “late” abortions, they have worked tirelessly since 1998 to
effectively ban Mifepristone, and to keep it banned.

In a strange way, the anti-choice Health Minister’s unprofessional
behaviour in commissioning the Chief Medical Officer to provide what
Liberal colleague Mal Washer called “lightweight” answers to “stupid
questions” about the drug’s safety has exposed the way the Harradine
amendments twist the proper, impartial, evidence-based processes that
Parliament - through the TGA - put in place to ensure Australians gained
timely access to good pharmaceuticals and were protected from the bad.
Tony Abbotts’s behaviour, in other words, has clearly demonstrated why
properly resourced experts on the basis of the evidence, not a single
individual with an axe to grind, should rule on what drugs should be
made available to Australian patients.

The right thing for the Government, and the Opposition to do, would be
to admit the terrible mistake they made close to a decade ago in backing
the Harradine amendments, and make amends to those injured by their
expedient mistake by voting together - along party lines - to remove
them from the TGA.

There wasn’t any conscience vote to enact the amendments. Balance and
justice suggest there shouldn’t be one to remove them either.