---
assets: ~
excerpt: Over the long weekend just past, there were several breakouts from the Christmas
  Island detention centre. Also, a 300 strong protest that officials said was a riot
  and quelled with beanbag rounds. Labor’s Immigration Minister Chris Bowen accused
  some of the asylum seekers of waging an “orchestrated campaign.”
link: ''
published: 2011-03-17
tag: writings
title: "No Non-Violent Political Action Please. Weâ\x80\x99re Australian"
---
*Civil rights, women’s rights, gay rights… it’s all wrong. Call in the
cavalry to disrupt this perception of freedom gone wild. God damn it!
First one wants freedom, then the whole damn world wants freedom.*

> Lyrics from “B Movie” by Gil Scott-Heron.

Over the long weekend just past, there were several breakouts
from the Christmas Island detention centre. Also, a 300 strong protest
that officials said was a riot and quelled with beanbag rounds. Labor’s
Immigration Minister Chris Bowen accused some of the asylum seekers of
waging an “orchestrated campaign.”

Christmas Island Shire President Gordon Thompson, speaking on ABC radio,
agreed. He said the detainees on Christmas Island had set out “to make a
peaceful protest,” going “into the community to be seen and to be
heard”. Their purpose? To “draw media attention to their plight.” A
plight that, according to refugee advocates, includes severe
overcrowding at the facility (built for 500 people, it now houses more
than 2,500) and extended delays in visas, including those already deemed
refugees.

The Shire President went on to say that having met with the asylum
seekers, his impression was that “a fairly strategic approach was taken
to protests.” He continued. “These people have come here with the
purpose of getting a visa… They’re forging a path for their families to
follow… The primary motivation of the protests is to get attention to
their plight and to have their situation resolved one way or another.”

Like many Australians, I have been following the national debate about
asylum-seekers arriving by boat since it became a partisan issue during
the Howard years. I remember well the dead-fish tones of then
Immigration Minister Phillip Ruddock insinuating that all attempts by
refugees to achieve a “desired migration outcome” were - and should
rightly be viewed by the community - as manipulative of our emotions,
Australian law, or both.

We saw this back in 2000 when senior government ministers including
Ruddock and Prime Minister John Howard said that asylum seekers had
thrown their children overboard, claims that would later be shown to be
false - and to have been known to be false by those making them.

The intent of the charges seemed be to undermine the character of boat
people. What sort of human beings would throw their own children
overboard at all, little less for the purpose of manipulating the good
nature of Australians, and our soft-hearted laws, to achieve a migration
outcome? Ruddock called it “one of the most disturbing incidents he’d
heard of in his public life” while Howard said, “I certainly don’t want
people of that type in Australia, I really don’t.”

For both men, and the audiences to which they were playing, the attempt
by asylum seekers to incite our sympathy invalidated their claim to it.
To the contrary, we were entitled to feel aggrieved by their overtures
and to draw negative inferences about the characters of those who would
“try it on” in such a way. Peter Mares traces this attitude back to the
late 19th century when the growth of China’s population led some
Australians to argue we were at risk of being overrun by more
“calculating and ruthless Asians.”

All this is confusing to those who are across the theory of non-violent
action, which includes passive resistance, peaceful demonstrations,
petitions and boycotts. All non-aggressive physical methods aimed at
awakening moral conscience in observers and - to paraphrase Martin
Luther King Jr - persuading the opponent of the justice of your case.

Odder still is our enthusiasm for such methods when used by those on
foreign soil. From Gandhi to the students in Tiananmen Square to
organizers of recent uprisings in Tunisia, Egypt and Libya, Australians
have supported disciplined concerted non-violent political action to
draw the eyes of the world to those with a political cause, and spark an
impulse to help.

So why when the orchestrated campaign is in our own backyard do we
baulk? Is it simply resistance to the terrible truth that sometimes we
are not the freedom-seekers but the oppressors? Is it as Gil Scott-Heron
suggests, that we talk a good game about freedom and democracy but are
in fact anxious about the rapid flowering of a world in which everyone
wants freedom and knows how to get it.