---
assets: ~
excerpt: Mixed-sex sleepovers? Help!
link: ''
published: 2011-01-30
tag: writings
title: Should Parents Allow Mixed Sex Sleepovers?
---
Since reaching adolescence my boys have been keen to have girls who are “just friends” sleep at our house, and I have been just as keen to avoid it.

Boys sleeping over have never been a problem. Over the years I have
happily purchased bunk and trundle beds, as well as air mattresses, to
facilitate it. But female friends? Sorry, I kept telling my sons. I’m
just not comfortable.

But no-because-I-say-so really doesn’t cut it as a reason for adolescent
boys and fair enough, too. I’ve always prided myself as a person who has
reasons for what I do. As a parent, when I don’t have a good reason for
saying no, I try to say yes.

Except when it came to girls sleeping over. Was I worried the girl’s
family was in the dark? Maybe, so when my son last asked I agreed to
speak to the parent. The exchange was comforting - the mother certainly
knew where her daughter would be and was realistic about my minimal
capacity for control - but my unease persisted.

“You’re being unreasonable about this,” my partner said. “Do you really
want to imply that boys can’t have friends who are girls?”

He shrugged. “And if they’re going to have sex, isn’t it better it
happens here instead of a park - away from prying eyes and close to
condoms?”

All good points but something still felt wrong, however inept I was at
articulating what it was.

“You’re acting like you’re worried your boy will take advantage,” a
friend finally said.

“No!” I said firmly. “That’s not it at all. My boys would NEVER touch a
girl in a way they thought she did not want.”

But here, perhaps, was a clue to my discomfort. What if the girl didn’t
know what she wanted?

There is a relatively straightforward relationship for boys between what
they want, what they say they want and what they pursue - with sex, and
everything else. Arguably, female socialisation is all about severing
such links so women can make the needs and wants of others - friends,
parents, needy children, ageing parents - their own.

We certainly know that adolescence is when many girls lose their
vitality, resilience and sense of self. Perhaps consequently, it is also
a time they are at increased risk of depression and eating disorders.

According to researchers Carol Gilligan and Lyn Mikel Brown, girls
struggle throughout their teens to take their own experiences, feelings
and thoughts seriously. Some can arrive at a place where it seems to
them that they cannot say or feel what they feel and know. Battling to
stay in a “genuine relationship” with themselves, they replace their
authentic voice with a stream of “I don’t knows”.

Suddenly, I had a way of explaining my angst. Sexual relationships are
complicated at the best of times. Introduce youth and the stuttering of
a partner who may be in the midst of a developmental struggle to
identify and express what she wants and misunderstandings seem
inevitable. I wanted nothing to do with it.

I also didn’t want to add to the confusing mix of social messages girls
get. What if saying yes to a sleepover felt subtly coercive to the girl,
as though I thought adolescent sex was normal or even expected. Instead,
I wanted to be like Switzerland when it came to adolescent sexual
activity, wanting only for each young person what she or he
authentically wanted for themselves.

Good thinking or over-thinking? I’d welcome your view.