---
assets: ~
published: 2011-03-23 12:12:09
tags: ~
title: "Letâ\x80\x99s Keep the Counsellors Honest and True"
---
Pregnancy counsellors must declare their stance on abortion.

Australian women have just inched one step closer to gaining access to
RU486. Last week, Cairns-based obstetrician Dr Caroline De Costa
received word that her application to become an authorised prescriber of
the medication had been approved by the national drug regulator, the
Therapeutic Goods Administration.

Despite the fanfare surrounding February’s passage of the cross-party
bill that removed the Heath Minister’s veto over the TGA’s decision to
register the drug, pregnant women are still awaiting access to the
medication - as a morning-after pill, to assist in labour or to
terminate a very early pregnancy without surgery - because no company
has submitted an application.

While De Costa’s approval as an authorised prescriber comes with
restrictions that preclude her from supplying other medical
practitioners with the drug, or accepting patients living outside far
north Queensland, it both signals and further strengthens the case for
TGA registration of the drug when an application is finally submitted.
This is because to say “yes” to De Costa, the TGA has to evaluate the
drug’s safety and efficacy against the seriousness of the condition, and
the acceptability of existing therapies to treat it. Signing off on her
application signals the regulator’s acceptance of the veracity and
quality of the research data demonstrating the drug’s safety and
efficacy that De Costa was required to submit to support her
application. This bodes well for requests before the TGA from other
medicos wanting to become authorised prescribers and an application by a
pharmaceutical company - when one finally is made - to make the drug
more broadly available.

Pro-choice supporters would also have been heartened by the recent
elevation of the staunchly pro-choice Louise Asher to the position of
deputy leader of the Liberal Party in Victoria to join pro-choice leader
Robert Doyle. With the Victorian Labor Party having recently affirmed
its commitment to amend the Victorian Crimes Act to make abortion legal
when a woman gives her informed consent, the stage is set for change
after the election in November.

Elsewhere, however, pro-life forces are making their influence felt. As
in Victoria, the Crimes Act in NSW prohibits abortion. Earlier this
month, the Crown prosecutor in the case of NSW doctor Dr Suman Sood
moved to amend the indictment to include a second charge of
administering a drug with “intent to procure a miscarriage”. If Sood is
convicted, women’s access to safe, legal terminations could be reduced
in NSW through the narrowing of the reach of the 1971 and 1995 common
law judgements that enable lawful abortion.

But perhaps nowhere have pro-life forces been more successful than in
their co-option of the word “counselling” to pursue their goal of
reducing women’s access to abortion.

In addition to being on the Federal Government payroll to the tune of
$295,000 in 2005 and 2006, the pro-life Australian Federation of
Pregnancy Support Services (formerly the Australian Federation of
Pro-Life Pregnancy Support Services) is manoeuvring to win the tender to
provide a national telephone helpline to support women to keep
pregnancies. The helpline, one of two recently announced “pregnancy
support measures”, is seen as compensation for Health Minister Tony
Abbott’s loss of control over RU486.

Will AFPSS win the helpline tender? They’re certainly in contention,
because while the Government has ruled out abortion providers from
tendering for the contract to ensure the provision of a “non-directive”
service, organisations with a religious or philosophical opposition to
abortion have been deemed to have the professionalism and
even-handedness necessary to apply.

While some Australians might question the appropriateness of the Federal
Government coat of arms being attached to a telephone hotline staffed by
a service with a principled opposition to advising or referring for
abortion, few would dispute the right of women to be told up-front and
unequivocally if a service will provide accurate information about, and
refer for, abortion. Yet there is no consumer protection regulation in
any state that prohibits pregnancy clinics from falsely advertising
their services. Because the services don’t levy a fee, the Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission cannot charge them with engaging in
misleading or deceptive advertising.

Last year, Pregnancy Counselling Australia, which has links to
international pro-life pregnancy centres, sent posters to GPs across the
country. Depicting the photo of a young attractive woman chewing her
nails the text read: “Pregnant? Upset?” “Free, confidential,
compassionate, counselling” on a 24-hour basis was promised to women who
rang the number provided. While the vast majority of GPs are pro-choice,
many were fooled by the poster and the accompanying covering letter that
implied that Pregnancy Counselling Australia offered a service that
would support and refer women for all three options with an unplanned
pregnancy: adoption, continuing and abortion. As Pregnancy Counselling
Australia requested, many put the poster in their consulting suites and
waiting rooms.

The Democrats have developed a private member’s bill to ensure truth in
advertising when it comes to pregnancy support services. To become law,
this bill - or one like it - will need cross-party support. The question
is: after the battle over RU486, do pro-choice activists and politicians
have the energy to battle as hard as will be required to achieve basic
consumer protection for pregnant women?