---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2011-03-23 12:12:08
title: After the DNA, will Abbott get a Reality Check?
---
Having found a lost a “son”, the Minister should be less critical of
others

The message from Health Minister Tony Abbott remains unequivocal:
Kathleen Donnelly, the mother of his wrongly assumed son, Daniel
O’Connor, is a “nice” girl.

As the latest twist in the ongoing adoption reunion story broke on
Monday night, Abbott made his continuing fondness for his old girlfriend
clear, despite his newfound awareness that she was sexually involved
with other men during the years he believed they were having an
exclusive affair.

While reporters repeatedly invited him to dump on Donnelly, Abbott
refused to pass judgement about what he described as “hot-blooded young
people”.

“We were all pretty wild back then so I am not in the business of making
critical judgements. She is a great girl and this doesn’t change any of
that”.

Indeed, in his interviews with the press last month, Abbott has
suggested that his “callow” decision to go overseas during Donnelly’s
pregnancy must also be understood in the context of his youthful
immaturity. Presumably, a similar explanation accounts for the couple’s
failure to use contraception throughout their years of intimate
involvement.

Such sentiments should be music to the ears of the vast majority of
Australians who support a woman’s right to choose. They imply that
having recently tried to give parents access to their teenager’s medical
records in order to stop their “open-slather sexual activity”, and to
restrict the access of women and couples to safe and affordable
abortion, Tony Abbott has seen the error of his ways.

Having refused to judge or condemn Donnelly for past mistakes, or
behaviour inconsistent with his moral values, is Abbott finally prepared
to recognise the arrogance of his past judgement of other woman and
couples who - like he and Donnelly - had sex and unintentionally wound
up pregnant? To realise that like he and Donnelly, we are all nice
people doing our best to live what we see as moral lives but at times
get waylaid by cloudy judgement, immaturity or sheer bad luck? That
everyone deserves to have their behaviour and decisions interpreted in
the context of their limits, and the framework of their lives?

If Donnelly can violate Abbott’s code of sexual morality but still be
judged a nice girl, then why not the rest of us? If the definition of a
nice girl (and boy, for that matter) is a person who does their best to
live well in a complex world where things don’t always go to plan, don’t
we all qualify?

What remains unclear is whether Abbott’s complex personal situation will
lead him to question his rigid and long-held views of female sexuality
and reproductive obligation. Remember, he comes from a family that
Donnelly says froze her out the moment they discovered she was pregnant.
Will Tony Abbott’s intimate engagement with the real world, with all its
shades of grey, collapse the nice girl/slut distinction that has driven
his agenda on sexuality and reproduction for so long?

According to psychologist Dr Susie Allanson, a counsellor of 15 years at
the East Melbourne Fertility Control Clinic, the odds are regrettably
slim. Over the years Allanson has counselled a number of women who are
not just morally opposed to abortion but have actively campaigned
against it being safe and legal. Yet, when they have found themselves
unhappily pregnant, they decide in favour of abortion.

The problem, says Allanson, is that while such women sympathise with
their own situation and feel confident their case justifies an abortion,
most refuse to allow their experience translate to compassion for other
women facing the same dilemma. Instead, these women prefer to see their
experience as unique and so no challenge to their abortion politics or
their uncompromising judgement of all aborting women - except
themselves, of course - as murderers.

Hypocrisy? You bet. And the worry is that Abbott will fall victim to
this most universally despised moral failing, too. That instead of
recognising that the personal limits and situational complexity
characterising his case precisely mirror the dilemmas others face on the
sexual, contraceptive and unplanned pregnancy front, that he’ll insist
on seeing them as one-off and one-of-a-kind. That rather than preserve
the freedom he and Kathleen had to make their own decisions - even
mistakes - and to take responsibility for them, he’ll continue to do all
in his power to deny those caught in a similar bind the freedom to
choose with dignity, according to their own needs and values.

According to Dr Allanson, imposing one’s rigid views on others relieves
the stress of those who find the contemporary world chaotic.
“Must-abating about others,” says Allanson, “gives such people a sense
of control”.

Tony Abbott has had control of his sexual and reproductive world and
now, as Health Minister in a government about to take control of both
houses of parliament, he is about to assume unprecedented control of
ours. The question is whether he will finally allow the evidence of his
own experience to collapse his rigid views about how others should
behave when it comes to sex, contraception and decisions about unplanned
pregnancies. Or will his rigid views about nice girls and sluts live to
see - and to guide the nation’s health policy - another day?