---
assets: ~
published: 2011-03-23 12:12:09
tags: ~
title: Abbott playing fast and loose with the truth
---
Since becoming Federal Health Minister, Tony Abbott has demonstrated a
casual, at times even antagonistic, relationship with facts that don’t
support his moral views. This week’s performance on Insiders continued
this lamentable tradition. The Minister claimed that non-Government
politicians supported “human cloning”, that the Government’s own expert
panel recommended the creation of “human animal hybrids”, and that a
private member’s bill sponsored by Senator Natasha Stott Despoja would
“force” pro-life organisations to “refer people to abortion services”,
and deny federal funding to those that didn’t.

In fact, the Lockhart Committee, as well as every reputable scientists
in the country, has supported a ban on reproductive cloning: the
implantation in a woman’s womb of an embryo created in the lab using a
technique called Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer. Senator Stott Despoja’s
bill does not require any pregnancy counselling agency to refer a woman
for an abortion. It simply demands that all services advertise in ways
that make clear to women whether they are pro-life or pro-choice.

It is noteworthy that while the Health Minister copped criticism from
all sides for what Queensland Liberal MP Michael Johnson labeled
“clearly inaccurate language”, and what Senator Stott Despoja described
as either “confusion” or a deliberate attempt by the Minister to mislead
the public, the Prime Minister is unconcerned. “Everybody can express
their view”, he told ABC radio. “Tony Abbott should not be restricted in
what he says just because he’s the Health Minister”.

But this response misses the point. Abbott is not being condemned for
what he believes, or for making his views plain, but for playing fast
and loose with the facts: a problem that his status as Federal Minister
for Health arguably makes worse.

Exaggerating, sensationalising, decontextualising, misconstruing,
mischaracterizing and misleading are all variations on the dishonesty
charge. In one case, there is a hair to split. In response to concerns
raised predominantly by pro-life groups that the demand for human eggs
left women vulnerable to exploitation, the Lockhart committee did
recommend a lifting of the ban on scientists pursuing the derivation of
embryonic stem cells from somatic cell nuclear transfer undertaken on
animal eggs. However, the recommendation clearly stipulates that such
embryos “not [be] implanted into the body of a woman or allowed to
develop for more than 14 days.” Hardly the living and breathing
Transylvanian chimera evoked by the Health Minister’s “human animal
hybrid” claim.

But charges of inaccuracy must be upheld for the remainder of the
Minister’s remarks. In fact, clarifications on the point the Minister
fudged with regard to pregnancy counselling were repeatedly offered
during hearings into the bill conducted around the nation last month.

Some may see such criticism as beside the point. Isn’t the Health
Minister’s only crime his willingness to be more open and honest than
other politicians about this passions and biases? Surely, given the
chance, all politicians attempt to shape law and policy to fit their
ideals. Why else pursue power?

This is true to a point. But use and abuse of power are two different
things. Telling fibs to discredit one’s opponents and their case for
change, not to mention relying on the prestige of high office to bolster
one’s falsehoods, is just not cricket. Rather, it is a condemnable
means-to-an-end strategy that disregards the rules for fair play in the
service of winning at all costs.

Further, those who operate in this fashion rule themselves out of the
role of honest broker in the event that their preferred approach is not
the one delivered by democratic processes. This has been the case with
Abbott and the drug RU486. Having fought so hard, and at times unfairly,
to prevent the removal of his ministerial veto over women’s access to
the drug (phrases like “backyard miscarriage” and “pop and forget” pill
peppered his contributions to the debate), significant questions hang
over his capacity to impartially oversee the post-conscience-vote
processes required to bring the drug to the market. In May, a
pharmaceutical company executive revealed that the Minister and his
office threatened his company with adverse consequences if it applied to
register the drug in Australia.

“The thing I enjoy most as a politician,” Tony Abbott said recently, “is
the opportunity to be taken seriously when you say something”.

Too right. And with such power comes responsibility. Tony Abottt is no
fool. He’s more than capable of getting across a brief, if this is what
he wishes to do. Minister Abbott’s failure to get the facts right when
issues of gender, reproduction and sexuality are at stake undermines the
quality of public debate on such matters.

It also casts doubt not just on his fitness for high office, but the
wisdom of the man who keeps him there.