---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2011-03-23 12:12:13
title: Womb Watching While Rome Burns
---
Climate change, soaring petrol and food prices, one in seven Australian
children living in poverty and catastrophic levels of violence in some
indigenous communities. These are just some current issues of national
importance that most Australians would see as legitimate topics for
debate.

Sadly, the womb watchers think otherwise.

It is no secret that former Prime Minister Howard gave unprecedented
license to the Christian fundamentalists in his party to use Australian
women’s fertility decisions as a means of wedging and distracting the
community. Single women with the temerity to want a child, and divorced
mothers dependent on the dole to raise one were the Government’s
favourite whipping girls.

When Howard fell, taking with him his incendiary choice of Health
Minister Tony Abbott - a.k.a. the \`mad monk’ - many sighed with relief.
Surely the Ministerial appointments of Julia Gillard and Nicola Roxon,
and the elevation of former AMA President Brendan Nelson to Opposition
leader signalled the demise of womb-watching as a national sport, and
the re-assertion of the commonsense belief that women and their partners
have the right to decide if and when they bear children.

But the view that the new Federal landscape represents a new dawn in
fertility politics is about to be tested. On 18 June, Tasmanian Liberal
Senator Guy Barnett gave notice of plans to table a motion in parliament
that would make women more than 14 weeks pregnant undergoing labour for
an “intrauterine fetal death, gross fetal abnormality or life
threatening maternal disease” pay for the procedure themselves. Medicare
funding, just for these women undertaking just this procedure, would no
longer be available.

So what if a woman has a dead fetus festering in her womb, or one
affected by what Barnett himself describes as a “common disabilities
such as Down syndrome and spina bifida.” Who cares if her condition puts
her life at risk? Where do such women get off thinking they not only
have a right to such medical care, but to have Medicare fund it? If Guy
Barnett, a self-described man of “conscience,” has his way, such feral
feminists will be coming down off that high horse, and quick.

The issue will come to a vote in September. Whether, and how strenuously
his Liberal and Labor colleagues will say much about the future of
womb-watching in this country.

Will Brendan Nelson maintain his long-held view that exiting Medicare
arrangements must stay in place to avoid backyard abortion, or will he
squib - as he did earlier this month when it came to lifting the ban on
foreign aid paying for abortion - in a fruitless attempt to please the
party’s right wing? Will Deputy PM Gillard and Health Minister Nicola
Roxon, two women whose hearts are clearly in the right place on this
issue stand up and be counted - both behind the scenes and in front of
the cameras - or will their ambition get in the way?

I’ve heard that when Barnett declared his intentions in the party room,
most of his colleagues rolled their eyes. Not just because most
Liberals-like most members of the ALP and 81% of Australians-support the
right of individuals to decide, but because they are sick to death of
discussing abortion.

Guy Barnett, if you don’t want to have an abortion, it’s OK. You don’t
have to have one. Now, can you get out of the conversational way so the
rest of the nation can discuss the issues that really matter.