---
assets: ~
published: 2011-03-23 12:12:07
tags: ~
title: An interminable debate
---
Giving Sorrow Words, By Melinda Tankard-Reist, Duffy & Snellgrove,
$17.95

Are women who have abortions free moral agents or coerced victims?

THE bulk of Giving Sorrow Words consists of 19 edited stories of women’s
grief after abortion. The stories, and the introduction and afterword
that sandwich them, emphasise female victimhood. In Melinda
Tankard-Reist’s world, women are coerced into having sex and abortions
they don’t want by their husbands, their parents, their doctors and, of
course, feminists and abortionists.

Quoting American anti-pornography campaigner Catharine MacKinnon
approvingly, Tankard-Reist asserts that women have been tricked into
believing they want and benefit from the contraceptives and abortion
that underpin their sexual freedom. Instead, abortion was legalised to
serve a man’s requirements for sexual access to women and free him of
the inconvenient results of that access, children.

Indeed, reading Giving Sorrow Words is like time-warping back to the
victim feminist hey-day of the late 1970s and "80s. There’s Adrienne
Rich asserting that abortion is violence against women, Catharine
MacKinnon insisting that most women only have sex because they are
regularly forced or pressured, and Germaine Greer claiming that women’s
real vulnerability in the matter of reproduction makes their claims to
any choice in the matter a fiction.

Such victim rhetoric - now largely discredited - reflected the struggle
of radical feminists to explain why women continued to mother - some
even pursuing painful infertility treatments to do so - despite their
assertions that motherhood was the locus of female oppression.

Similarly, Tankard-Reist struggles to depict women as helpless,
indoctrinated, coerced victims who lack any trace of moral agency in
order to explain why they have sex when they don’t want to become
mothers, and abort unwanted pregnancies. It is only once she has
demonstrated that all women have sex, use contraception and have
abortions against their will, that she can claim that the prohibitionist
policies on abortion supported by her long-time employer Senator Brian
Harradine actually liberate women.

It’s a big agenda, and one at which she fails miserably. Because what
becomes clear as one turns page after page of what even Tankard-Reist
admits makes bleak reading is that what women find so painful are
problematic pregnancies, not problematic abortions.

As the stories, and the recent NHMRC Information Paper on Termination of
Pregnancy in Australia makes clear, one of the biggest predictors of
ongoing ambivalence after abortion (a phenomenon experienced by only 2
per cent of aborting women) is coercion. This coercion can come in the
form of social circumstances - such as unemployment - that women feel
preclude them from being a good mother, and abusive or threatening
husbands/boyfriends or parents.

Aside from the ongoing pursuit by feminists of social equity and justice
for women, feminist abortion service providers operating in public
free-standing clinics seek to enhance female autonomy by adhering to
best-practice information and counselling guidelines. Such an approach
acknowledges the woman’s values and competence as a moral
decision-maker.

It is unfortunate that proper counselling is an expense some private
operators seek to avoid. Perhaps if Tankard-Reist changed tacks and
encouraged Harradine to stop trying - in line with his religious
commitments - to derail, defund and legally harass such clinics, there
would be fewer sorrowful women needing their stories told in the first
place.