---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2011-03-23 12:12:08
tags: ~
title: "Senatorâ\x80\x99s choices could mean none for women"
---
There’s only one thing I have to say about Queensland National’s Senator
Barnaby Joyce. I hope he’s telling the truth.

“About Tesltra?” you might ask. Or Voluntary Student Unionism, where
Joyce has sworn to vote against any Coalition bills that will reduce
student services. Or perhaps you think I’m referring to Joyce’s seeming
willingness to block some aspects of the government’s proposed changes
to industrial relations?

Nope, my thoughts are somewhere else, though any confusion could be
forgiven. The extensive media coverage of Joyce (including somewhere
around 1297 articles since his election including at least 25 profiles)
has focused almost exclusively on Joyce’s publicly stated position on
these issues to the exclusion of his repeated assertions on a subject of
similar - if not greater - importance to the 50% of Australians not
currently running the world. That subject is abortion.

My fervent hope - prayer really - that Joyce will be as good as his word
refers to the Senator’s hand-on-heart pledge that he would never
horse-trade his vote on other issues to secure concessions on abortion
laws or funding. Or so he told intrepid Fairfax journalist Misha
Schubert who diligently relayed his comments in a recent news item
mainly concerned with the recent scuttling by anti-choice MPs (Joyce
amongst them) of a routine parliamentary motion reaffirming Australia’s
backing for reproductive health services in developing nations.

Those with a good grasp of recent political history will know why
supporters of reproductive choice are so anxious about Joyce’s
veritableness. They will remember the backroom deal struck by both major
political parties with anti-choice Senator Brian Harradine in 1996 to
ensure his vote for the partial privitisation of Telstra. In exchange,
and to their eternal shame, both Labor and the Coalition voted with the
Tasmanian Senator to effectively ban Australian women from accessing a
drug called mifepristone or RU486 by requiring the Health Minister to
personally approve the importation, evaluation, registration and listing
of the drug and to table that approval in parliament.

Of course, the effective banning of mifepristone has not only denied
women access to a safe effective non-surgical method of abortion able to
be used the moment an unwanted pregnancy is discovered (surgical
terminations can not be done before the 5th or 6th week of pregnancy).
It has also led women needing emergency contraception with fewer
side-effects, and women seeking an effective method of oestrogen-free
contraception to miss out. As well, the ban has left patients with
breast cancer, prostate cancer, inoperable meningiomas and Cushing’s
Syndrome in the lurch. Indeed, so important is mifepristone to
Australian patients in general, and female patients in particular, that
the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists recently called on the government to review the drug’s
availability. A call the anti-choice Health Minister Tony Abbott seems
destined to ignore. Indeed, prior to Joyce’s capitulation on Telstra,
defenders of reproductive freedom were aghast at the possibility that
yet another Senator who preached justice and fairness would trade their
vote on the telco for a policy outcome that ignores just those values
where women are concerned.

Of course, Harradine was a wily and experienced legislator who knew
precisely how to wield his power for the tiny communities he represented
at the expense of the less ably-represented majority. But Joyce is no
dolt either. At least not according to Professor Brian Costa, a
political scientist at Swinburne, who describes him as a “quite
well-educated, articulate, smart operator”. And Senator Joyce is firmly
opposed to women’s reproductive freedom. Having told a Right to Life
Conference in July that his greatest goal in public life was to ban “the
unfortunate carnage” of abortion, he used his first speech in parliament
to identify abortion as the “slavery debate of our time”.

And while the full sale of Telstra is a done deal, the danger for
Australian women has not passed. Throughout the entire term of this
Howard government Joyce’s vote will be needed to achieve the
government’s legislative agenda. As each piece of legislation goes
before the party room ~~- to ban compulsory student unionism,
reconfigure industrial relations, revamp the tax system~~ Joyce will be
there, demanding a pound of flesh for his support.

The only question is whose flesh will be for sale?