---
assets: ~
excerpt: Informed women have the right to choose their delivery method
published: 2011-01-02
tags: ~
title: "Thereâ\x80\x99s No Shame in Being Too Posh to Push"
---
Mention Australia’s caesarean section rate and collective tongues start
wagging. Our rate is too high, the experts say, partly because some
mothers are too posh to push.

It is true that Australia’s caesarean rate is high and, until recently,
climbing. In 1997, 20 per cent of women gave birth by caesarean. By
2007, the rate had climbed to 31 per cent, where it remains. This is at
least double the 10 to 15 per cent proportion recommended by the World
Health Organisation.

But that ideal is 25 years out of date. Britain’s Parliamentary Office
of Science and Technology says that if it repeated the exercise used to
arrive at the initial figures, it would come up with a “rather higher
range”. This is because the recommendation was derived from caesarean
figures in countries that had the lowest mortality rates at the time
and, today, few countries have caesarean rates below 15 per cent.

Caesarean rates follow the money. In Brazil, caesarean rates in the
private sector are 80 per cent. In Australia, women giving birth in
private hospitals have a caesarean rate of 41 per cent, compared to 28
per cent for those in the public system.

Staff attitudes and institutional culture with regard to women’s choice
also play a part. In one Australian study, 62 per cent of women having a
caesarean in a private hospital said their healthcare provider had
recommended it. This contrasted with the 40 per cent in the public
sector.

A comparison of two British hospitals by the Parliamentary Office of
Science and Technology found that caesarean rates were lower in the
institution where women lacked the “freedom” to “express a preference
for caesarean section” and higher where women were “given information
about the known relative risks of [caesarean] and vaginal birth”and
allowed to make … the final choice".

Such findings should sound alarm bells to anyone interested in the right
of women to make free and self-directed choices about their medical
care.

The “too posh to push” claim is mostly myth. Anecdotal evidence from
Britain suggests that some women request caesareans because they fear
the pain of labour. We know from Australian and overseas data that most
women want to have their baby the old-fashioned way. Guesstimates of
those without medical indicators who choose caesarean are between 3 and
15 per cent. This fits with the observation of the International
Federation of Gynaecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) that most women will act
to improve their chance of having a normal birth and healthy baby if
they have access to the necessary information and support. In other
words, most pregnant women will choose the option medical staff tell
them is in their and their foetus’s best interest.

But what if they don’t? There is no hard evidence on the relative risks
and benefits of caesarean delivery for non-medical reasons compared with
vaginal delivery. This makes emphatic assertions by health experts that
vaginal birth is safer than elective caesarean for low-risk pregnant
women worth less than a hill of beans.

In the absence of definitive data, there are arguments both ways. One
study found 31 per cent of female obstetricians would chose a caesarean
over vaginal delivery because of risks of stress incontinence, anal
sphincter damage and compromised sexual function following vaginal
delivery.

Even if medicos had the evidence on which to base an agreed
recommendation about elective caesarean, women would still have the
right to decide differently. The freedom to review and evaluate the
risk/benefit profile of all available medical options and to make a
decision based on one’s own needs and values is what informed choice is
all about.

The bottom line is that - short of engaging in self or child abuse -
women do not have to prove to health professionals that their healthcare
choices are good or worthy ones to have the right to decide. This is as
true about their choice of delivery method as it is about how they look
after themselves while pregnant, and how they mother once the baby is
born.

Pregnant women can choose a glass of wine with dinner, to have their
baby by caesarean and to feed by bottle instead of breast. As long as
they are making the decision freely, and on the basis of a substantial
understanding of the issues, the choice belongs to them.