---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2011-03-23 12:12:16
tag: writings
title: Parents Left in the Lurch
---
Parental leave - or maternity leave, as we tiresomely insist on thinking
about it - is back in the news. Australia’s National Employment
Standards now includes the right of workers to request 12 months of
unpaid parental leave in addition to the year to which they are already
entitled. A right to request flexible working arrangements to care for a
child under school age is also part of the “Fair Work” mix.

Fair? Work? In fact, the new provisions aren’t fair to anyone - not
mothers, fathers or children - and they may reduce even further the
tenuous attachment Australian mothers have to the workforce. The
essential conundrum of parenthood can be summed up simply as this:
working parents of young children want to be in two places at once. They
want to be caring for their children, and they want (and in most cases
need) to be in paid work.

This is not, at its core, a gender problem. Young Australian women now
participate in the workforce at the same rate as men and have similar
aspirations with regard to earnings and careers. While mothers bear the
brunt of pregnancy and childbirth, once the cord is cut, fathers,
grandparents and other relatives - not to mention trained child-care
workers - are all capable of providing quality care for children.

In countries committed to equality between the sexes, the parenthood
conundrum is articulated in gender-neutral ways. When Sweden’s generous
parental leave provisions were taken up mostly by mothers, a portion was
designated for dads on a use-it-or-lose-it basis. This bolstered women’s
attachment to the workforce and freed men to take the time they said
they wanted to care for their children, without losing points with the
boss.

Long stretches away from work are bad for employees and despised by
employers. Jobs are restructured out of existence, and the lifetime
earnings and superannuation savings of absent workers take a hit from
which they never recover. It may not be discrimination, but women’s lack
of hours and experience relative to men - largely due to “career
interruptions” caused by motherhood - account for the 17 per cent less
that Australian women earn on average compared with men.

Men and children also miss out when women are the only ones to withdraw
from paid employment to shoulder the parenting load. Australian men
consistently cite work as a barrier to greater involvement with their
children, while reports on generation Y men suggest they see sharing the
housework and child care as a moral obligation. Australian children
report missing their largely absent fathers, while research confirms
that the presence of a loving and nurturing dad is as important for a
child’s happiness, wellbeing, and social and academic success as having
a loving and nurturing mother.

The upshot of all this is that in the absence of carrots and sticks to
encourage men to step up and women to step out, it will be Australian
mothers who are most likely to take up the Government’s grant of an
additional year of unpaid leave, and to wear the associated financial
and work-related consequences.

The same can be said about the right to request flexible work
arrangements. Part-time and flexible hours are an essential but
imperfect tool for solving the parenthood conundrum, yet some workplaces
continue to expect full-time hours from workers on part-time pay, and
the reduced visibility or productivity of the flexible workers often
means they are overlooked for promotion.

Again the problem is equality. If parents of both genders use flexible
work conditions, then the associated costs will fall to both. But if
only mothers are demanding such arrangements, then they become the group
some employers would prefer to avoid hiring, or will choose to
marginalise on the aptly named “mummy-track”, while fathers and
childless workers get away scot-free.

The Government’s new employment standards are not just blind to
persistent inequalities of gender, but to social class as well. As Labor
knows, bearing and raising children is expensive. Add to this the
soaring cost of housing, and few Australians have the luxury of having
one parent not working for years at a time. Any government serious about
offering the bulk of Australian parents real opportunities to care for
their children would ensure that parental leave was paid.

Paid parental leave has been a political football for too long. Last
month the National Civic Council took Tony Abbott to task for supporting
maternity (not parental) leave, which it sees as part of a feminist
conspiracy “to reward women who make feminist-approved lifestyle
choices”. Conservative Christians are able to influence Labor as well -
the party dropped its commitment to paid maternity leave from its
platform before the last election, then flipped the issue to the
neo-liberal Productivity Commission to rule on when it won the election.

We need to set the squealing of minorities aside and put the financial,
social and emotional needs of the majority of Australian mothers,
fathers and children first.

Australian mums and dads need, want and have a right to employment and
to share the work of looking after their children. Work and care must be
shared and parental leave must be paid. It really is as simple as that.