---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2011-03-23 12:12:16
tags: ~
title: "Baby Leave is not a Womenâ\x80\x99s Issue"
---
The politics are stupendous. Tony Abbott, a former employment minister
who swore that paid maternity leave would become policy over the Howard
government’s “dead body”, has a radical change of heart. Now Opposition
Leader, he promises to introduce 26 weeks of paid parental leave in the
first term of a Coalition government.

“The difference between our scheme and Labor’s … is that mothers get
real time and real money,” Abbott said. “I am determined to give women a
better chance in the workforce, not to make it more difficult for them.”

The announcement of the scheme, on International Women’s Day, left
Labor’s delayed and paltry paid parental plan for dead, and the
government casting about for lines. Witness Minister for the Status of
Women Tanya Plibersek joining with the Business Council of Australia and
the Australian Chamber of Commerce to lament the injustice of this
“massive new tax on Australian businesses”.

Experts and industry groups were also dismayed. Australian Industry
Group chief executive Heather Ridout and Sex Discrimination Commissioner
Elizabeth Broderick fretted that an extended leave scheme such as
Abbott’s might discourage the employment of women.

What is wrong with this picture? The same thing that has been wrong
since the battle for paid leave began more than 40 years ago. We say
paid parental leave, but we mean paid maternity leave. From the language
to the symbolism to the fraught politics and poor policy that
characterise this debate, work/life policy is crippled by the absence of
men.

While Abbott’s proposal is more generous than the government’s safety
net plan of 18 weeks at minimum pay, both schemes are fatally flawed.
Discussed, designed and sold in the language of “mums”, they flagrantly
disregard the role men should - and many want to - play in the lives of
their children. By failing to talk about childcare and paid leave as
something of critical importance to children, men and women, both
political parties doom us to more of the same work/life crunch. More
oppressed women, more dissatisfied men, more children with exhausted
mums and absent dads.

Did you know that Australian men - 68 per cent in one poll - want more
involvement in their children’s lives, but are impeded by work demands?
Did you know that children whose fathers contribute meaningfully to
their care have improved social skills, higher self-esteem and better
results at school?

Do you know that children tell researchers they want to spend more time
with their fathers, and no amount of additional mother-time quells that
ache? Did you know that women doing most of the second-shift of
childcare and housework report feeling guilty and exhausted? Those who
work part-time or stay at home reduce their lifetime earnings by at
least $160,000 per child, end up on the “mummy track” when they return
to work and wind up with 50 per cent less superannuation than men on
similar wages.

The most obvious solution to this problem continues to be overlooked -
namely, that fathers and mothers share fairly the joys and burdens of
paid employment and caring for their children - speaks volumes about the
capacity of vested interests and entrenched social attitudes to stifle
progress.

That this is the case seems particularly clear given the ease with which
a gender-equity paradigm could be given effect in policy. All we need to
do is this: we need to say “parental leave” and mean it. We need to
follow the lead of comparable OECD countries by allocating paid parental
leave entitlements to families in a way that allows them to share it,
and with a use-it-or-lose-it component for dads.

Male leave must be actively encouraged in the short term because of our
stubborn insistence on defining childcare and paid leave as “woman’s
issues”. This has meant that despite many men wanting to care for their
infants (50 per cent in one British study), they fear being ridiculed
and punished as “unserious” if they do.

Use-it-or-lose-it provisions allow men to care for their children
without suffering workplace repercussions, while leaving those who don’t
free to knock back their entitlement.

At the start of the 21st century, the shift to a gender equity paradigm
- and to serious, costed policy to match - is long overdue.

It is time for a paid leave policy that includes fathers as equal
participants, and promotes the best interests of children. It is time to
put an end to all the waste, not just of female talent, but of the work
of past generations of feminists who raised their sons to share the
earning and the caring with their partners - until backward-looking
policy and rhetoric made them think again.

Repeat after me: the key to female liberation is men.