---
assets: ~
published: 2011-03-23 12:12:14
tags: ~
title: "Womenâ\x80\x99s Rights? Donâ\x80\x99t Make Me Laugh"
---
It wasn’t true then, and it still isn’t now. In fact, it’s a big, fat
porky pie. I’m talking about women’s rights and the scary potential
that, however flaccidly they are enshrined in law now, things are about
to get worse.

Remember the salad days? When multiculturalism, terrorism and the
so-called clash of civilizations were front page news? I do. I remember
in particular because of the astonishing conga line of fair, fat and
fiftyish politicians who paraded themselves before the cameras to
declare that at the heart of the difference between the progressive,
Christian west and the backwards civilizations of the east, was the
different value we placed on equality between the sexes.

Ha! Gender sympathy, little less equity, remains a pipe dream in
contemporary Australia. Despite the premature rush of celebrations among
women when the long-awaited ass-end of Howard and Tony Abbott pulled
into view, so far the Rudd government has fared little better.

Take maternity leave. Now you almost have it, now you don’t. After
promising it to working parents for years, and despite bucketloads of
cash being splashed around town, the provision of a small but vital
payment to working parents appears to be the one promise the Government
is willing to break.

But the paid parental leave fiasco pales in comparison to the slap women
are likely to get from the consultation currently taking place on a
national Bill of Rights. Rudd showed his hand early on this, appointing
a Catholic Priest, Father Frank Brennan, as chair. Since then, Brennan
has been scratching his head over how to produce a secular charter
enumerating the freedoms and responsibilities of all Australian citizens
that fits with his Church’s view that in the Kingdom of God, some are
more equal than others.

Predictably, the lunar religious right has been out in force as the
Human Rights caravan tours the country, proffering advice to the Priest
about how the unreasonable entitlement religious organizations currently
enjoy to discriminate against women and gays with impunity can be
further entrenched in law. Just imagine a university or corporation
citing gender or sexual orientation as justification for denying some of
their employees’ senior roles, or any job at all. It would never happen,
yet in Australia, religious institutions and the schools they run do it
everyday.

Stay tuned for a charter that waxes lyrical about the value of religious
and cultural freedoms (read, the rights of men at the helm of
ecclesiastical and ethnic communities to discriminate against gays and
women), but is more reticent about the importance of bodily security and
control, and of not being discriminated against in the exercise of one’s
conscience or faith (read, the rights of gays and women to the same
basic freedoms as everyone else).

Where are the female fiddlers in Rudd’s cabinet while women’s rights and
opportunities burn? Absent without leave, as near as I can tell.
Apparently, just seeing them in there, playing ball with the big boys,
is meant to reassure us that feminism is not dead. That any of them
might use their power to serve their convictions is clearly beyond the
brief. Indeed, it was Gillard who was left to explain why a modest,
well-considered entitlement for working parents that could be funded for
a fraction of the stimulus package that was announced at Christmas was
not a government “priority.”

Gender equity a core Australian value. Please, don’t make me laugh.