---
assets: ~
link: ''
published: 2011-03-23 12:12:18
tag: writings
title: Why Australians Need a Right to Die
---
Senator Bob Brown has been trying for some time to repeal the Euthanasia
Laws Act, a federal law that denies the Northern Territory and the ACT
the right to legislate for assisted suicide. But the new-found power of
the Greens and federal parliamentary arrangements arising from the hung
parliament will soon deliver a vote.

If the euthanasia act is repealed, the 1995 Northern Territory law it
was designed to overrule will be back in operation. The ACT, which at
the time of the federal kibosh was set to introduce dying-with-dignity
legislation, may try again.

Opponents of the right to die with dignity have been tut-tutting about
the Greens’ commandeering of valuable time to debate the issue, which
Opposition Leader Tony Abbott says is not “bread and butter”.\
Those who are terminally ill, who fear they might be someday or love
someone who is, see it differently.

Indeed, I bet that most of the conscience issues likely to come before
Parliament this term will be of far greater interest to the average
Australian than most of the legislation that a typical majority
government unilaterally decides merits attention.

A 2007 Newspoll survey found 80 per cent of Australians supported
doctor-assisted suicide for the terminally ill and suffering. Of those
who did not, most (84 per cent) were religious. Despite this, opponents
of reform have lately taken to insisting that religion has nothing to do
with their stance.

While this makes sense tactically, the results can be confusing. In a
pluralist society, appeals to the faith-based views of religious groups
to justify laws that govern us all must - and should - fail.

But when faith-based commitments are the true source of a conclusion
that dying with dignity is wrong and reason is used selectively in a
post-hoc justification strategy, the result can be an intellectual dog’s
breakfast.\
The tools of secular ethical reasoning can’t be used in good faith if
one’s faith commitments require a particular conclusion be reached. You
must go where the argument takes you.

Further confusion arises when politicians think the personal choice they
would make if faced with a terminal illness must match the decision they
make as legislators about dying-with-dignity laws.

Laws that allow Australians to die with dignity won’t compel anyone to
use them. This contrasts with the current situation, in which laws mean
all terminally ill Australians must face their death in the manner one
religious group thinks is right.

MPs who truly believe in religious freedom and the rights of the
individual should support legislation to allow everyone to choose how
they’ll face their own death, even if the choice to die with dignity is
not one they would make personally. Indeed, it is hypocritical for them
to use a conscience vote to pass laws that deny a freedom of conscience
to others.

Opponents of dying with dignity will tell you that the core moral
principle in a civilised society is respect for life. This is outdated
tosh. The central moral value in a modern multicultural society is
autonomy, the right of individuals to determine the course of their own
lives and deaths according to their own needs and values.

It is easy to tolerate others’ choices when we agree with them. The true
test for “pro-life” politicians will be if they understand enough about
what religious freedom really means to permit their fellow citizens to
make a moral choice they think is wrong.