---
_blueprint:
  content: "Fish rot from the head down. So do unethical businesses and corrupt societies.
    This is as true when the fish is an unethical business as one of the arm of liberal
    democratic government â\x80\x93 executive, judicial or legislative. It is also
    true of the fourth estate or free press, the often forgotten power-centre that
    is the key to a functioning democracy.\r\n\r\nRevelations that Rupert Murdochâ\x80\x99s
    tabloid The News of the World was bribing police and listening to, and ever interfering
    with, the phone messages of average British citizens struck by tragedy â\x80\x93
    including the parents of murdered schoolgirls and relatives of those killed in
    the London underground bombings - has sparked a revolt by UK citizens and consumers
    of News media around the world.\r\n\r\nAfter nearly six years of senior News executives
    claiming that the scandal was contained to the tabloid and a few rogue hirelings,
    the paper has been shut down from this week. Around 160 jobs have been lost, though
    Rebekah Brooks, chief executive of News International and editor of the News of
    the World when phones were being hacked, has managed to keep her post and boss
    Rupert Murdoch's favour.\r\n\r\nNot surprisingly, the decision to close the paper
    has barely muted the bays for blood, especially in light of new reports this morning
    showing a more than ten-year assault on the privacy of Gordon Brown by News International
    & others agencies, including invasion of the former PM's legal, tax, bank, phone
    and even his child's medical records. Those in the know have seen the shut-down
    as a bid to protect The Precious, rather than proof that News has finally decided
    to accept responsibility for what's gone wrong. The Precious is Murdoch's ambition
    to assume full control of the highly profitable pay-TV operator BSkyB. The take-over
    was once-considered a fait accompli but is now at risk over concerns that News
    Corp directors â\x80\x93 including James Murdoch who has been accused of misleading
    parliament about the scandal and authorizing payoffs to silence victims â\x80\x93
    may not be \"fit and proper\" people to hold the broadcasting licence. While the
    communications regulator Ofcom had already been expressing doubts, the government
    has now referred the entire matter to the Competition Commission.  \r\n\r\nNone
    of this has escaped the public or the non-News International press, which have
    largely focused on Murdoch's refusal to sack Rebekah Brooks as evidence that News
    remains clueless about how to begin healing the suppurating ethical sores on the
    body of its media business. The claim is that unless Brooks goes, we can never
    be confident of knowing the full extent of News hacking crimes and misdemeanours.
    Nor can we be confident that those who run the business truly \"get\" why their
    behaviour was so wrong, and why the public deserve meaningful guarantees it will
    never happen again.\r\n\r\nI agree that Brooks deserves to lose her job, and must
    do so if the company is ever to put the scandal behind it. Because while the News
    International Chief Executive has said that it is \"inconceivable that [she] knew
    or worse, sanctioned these appalling allegations,\" what is truly inconceivable
    is that she could be â\x80\x93 or be seen to be â\x80\x93 an appropriate person
    to sit on top of internal investigations and cooperate with external ones. To
    paraphrase one Tweeter on the issue, how can Brooks get to the bottom of the scandal
    when she was at the top of it? In other words, Brooks has a conflict of interest.
    Only a media organisation entirely free of her, and therefore with no reason to
    hide any discoveries implicating her, will have any chance of being believed on
    the findings of the companyâ\x80\x99s own probe of the matter, and on any claims
    that henceforth â\x80\x93 unlike the past - News is fully cooperating with police
    and parliamentary inquiries. \r\n\r\nBut to really set things right, we'll need
    more than Brooks' head on a pike. The abuse of media power that lies at the heart
    of the phone hacking scandal can be seen in News Corp media in other parts of
    the world, including Murdoch's Australian tabloids and the national broadsheet,
    The Australian. Indeed, part of the horror generated by the News of the World
    scandal is its exposure of how unchecked media power can corrupt the foundational
    institutions â\x80\x93 and so the very workings â\x80\x93 of democracy. Confessions
    in recent days suggest that Scotland Yard may have aided James Murdoch's desire
    to \"box\" - or contain - the damage by deciding not to further investigate the
    scandal, perhaps because of fear of exposing corrupt cops or wearing the excoriating
    heat of unfavourable News Corp editorials. British politicians are now confessing
    they have been similarly cowed, \"None of the leading politicians wanted to touch
    [the scandal] because of the power of Murdoch and the fear that they had,\" said
    one MP.\r\n\r\nThe inordinate power of the Murdoch press, and fear of landing
    on the wrong side of it, has a decisive influence on the Australian political
    landscape, too. I am personally aware of a successful opposition campaign to win
    state government focused almost exclusively on promulgating policies the Murdoch
    tabloid was seen to support. As The Age argued yesterday, News Ltd's Australian
    papers have \"largely abandoned\" valuing or attempts to achieve \"journalistic
    impartiality\", embarking instead on a \"series of vendettas against its designated
    foes\". Such enemies included Victoria's former police commissioner, Simon Overland,
    after he suggested the paper had irresponsibly published details of anti-terror
    raids before they occurred.\r\n\r\nNow that the tide has turned in the UK, those
    silenced by fear have rounded on the News bully, crying mea culpa for having lacked
    the balls to have resisted pressure to sell the public out. UK Assistant Police
    Commissioner John Yates now says his hasty 2009 decision not to reopen an investigation
    into News International was \"a pretty crap one\" and that while he usually \"put
    the victim first\", when it came to News he didnâ\x80\x99t \"follow my principle
    and that is my greatest regret\".\r\n\r\nBritish MP Zac Goldsmith is also beating
    his breast. He charges News with ''systemic abuse of almost unprecedented power\",
    saying the organisation \"has grown too powerful and has abused that power. It
    has systematically corrupted the police and, in my view, has gelded this Parliament,
    to our shame\".' Such personal and systemic failures, the Prime Minister David
    Cameron admits, has shaken the trust of British citizens in the foundational institutions
    of their democracy. \"For people watching this scandal unfold, there is something
    very disturbing about what they see,\" said Cameron. \"Just think of who they
    put their trust in: the police to protect them, the politicians to represent them
    and the press to inform them. And all of them have been let down.\"\r\n\r\nSuch
    admissions of failure and public self-flagellation are necessary, but they will
    not be sufficient to ensure British democracy recovers from the News of the World
    scandal. To emerge stronger, British leaders must restore the integrity of democratic
    institutions and the trust of citizens in them. Achieving this will be the work
    of numerous British Parliamentary enquiries that, as part of their brief, will
    need to seriously consider additional regulation of the power of the press. If
    our Australian leaders are smart â\x80\x93 and thatâ\x80\x99s a rhetorical phrasing,
    you donâ\x80\x99t need you to answer it â\x80\x93 theyâ\x80\x99d jump at the chance
    to implement a similar inquiry into abuses of media power here.\r\n\r\nThis seems
    particularly true in light of evidence â\x80\x93 offered this weekend by Fairfax
    wanker â\x80\x93 Rupert Murdochâ\x80\x99s term - and former Herald Sun editor
    Bruce Guthrie. Guthrie claims there are no ethical framework guiding the way News
    produces its content because Rupert Murdoch is hostile to it. Respected media
    commentator Margaret Simons agrees, extending this observation beyond News Ltd
    newsrooms. Even where such codes exist, says Simons, they are rarely attended
    to and impossible to enforce. \"Those of us who have worked in media organisations
    know that it is rare for ethical codes to be referred to or taken seriously, if
    they stand in the way of getting the story. It is also almost impossible, particularly
    in this country, to enforce the codes.\"\r\n\r\nAny inquiry into media regulation
    is risky, I acknowledge this. It risks the power of the media being curtailed
    not to defend the private rights of citizens or the public interest, but to stop
    journalists shining light into the dark corners that politicians â\x80\x93 those
    who do the regulating â\x80\x93 would prefer remained ill-lit. But to say that
    appropriate and balanced regulation would be impossible to achieve, or more outlandishly
    that the media - unlike all other power-centres in a democracy - needs no checks
    or balances on its influence, is self-interested rubbish.\r\n\r\nWe stand at a
    unique point in history, where what once seemed impossible â\x80\x93 the placing
    of checks on media practices that abuse power and corrupt our democratic institutions
    - now does not. British leaders in law enforcement and parliament have been forced
    into action by the News of the World scandal. Australian leaders should not wait
    until our own citizens find themselves victims of similar media abuses of power
    before they launch similar action.\r\n\r\nThis piece was [quoted](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-14118864)
    on the BBC News website. "
  content_markup: "<p>Fish rot from the head down. So do unethical businesses and
    corrupt societies. This is as true when the fish is an unethical business as one
    of the arm of liberal democratic government â\x80\x93 executive, judicial or legislative.
    It is also true of the fourth estate or free press, the often forgotten power-centre
    that is the key to a functioning democracy.</p>\n\n<p>Revelations that Rupert
    Murdochâ\x80\x99s tabloid The News of the World was bribing police and listening
    to, and ever interfering with, the phone messages of average British citizens
    struck by tragedy â\x80\x93 including the parents of murdered schoolgirls and
    relatives of those killed in the London underground bombings &ndash; has sparked
    a revolt by UK citizens and consumers of News media around the world.</p>\n\n<p>After
    nearly six years of senior News executives claiming that the scandal was contained
    to the tabloid and a few rogue hirelings, the paper has been shut down from this
    week. Around 160 jobs have been lost, though Rebekah Brooks, chief executive of
    News International and editor of the News of the World when phones were being
    hacked, has managed to keep her post and boss Rupert Murdoch&rsquo;s favour.</p>\n\n<p>Not
    surprisingly, the decision to close the paper has barely muted the bays for blood,
    especially in light of new reports this morning showing a more than ten-year assault
    on the privacy of Gordon Brown by News International &amp; others agencies, including
    invasion of the former PM&rsquo;s legal, tax, bank, phone and even his child&rsquo;s
    medical records. Those in the know have seen the shut-down as a bid to protect
    The Precious, rather than proof that News has finally decided to accept responsibility
    for what&rsquo;s gone wrong. The Precious is Murdoch&rsquo;s ambition to assume
    full control of the highly profitable pay-TV operator BSkyB. The take-over was
    once-considered a fait accompli but is now at risk over concerns that News Corp
    directors â\x80\x93 including James Murdoch who has been accused of misleading
    parliament about the scandal and authorizing payoffs to silence victims â\x80\x93
    may not be &ldquo;fit and proper&rdquo; people to hold the broadcasting licence.
    While the communications regulator Ofcom had already been expressing doubts, the
    government has now referred the entire matter to the Competition Commission.</p>\n\n<p>None
    of this has escaped the public or the non-News International press, which have
    largely focused on Murdoch&rsquo;s refusal to sack Rebekah Brooks as evidence
    that News remains clueless about how to begin healing the suppurating ethical
    sores on the body of its media business. The claim is that unless Brooks goes,
    we can never be confident of knowing the full extent of News hacking crimes and
    misdemeanours. Nor can we be confident that those who run the business truly &ldquo;get&rdquo;
    why their behaviour was so wrong, and why the public deserve meaningful guarantees
    it will never happen again.</p>\n\n<p>I agree that Brooks deserves to lose her
    job, and must do so if the company is ever to put the scandal behind it. Because
    while the News International Chief Executive has said that it is &ldquo;inconceivable
    that [she] knew or worse, sanctioned these appalling allegations,&rdquo; what
    is truly inconceivable is that she could be â\x80\x93 or be seen to be â\x80\x93
    an appropriate person to sit on top of internal investigations and cooperate with
    external ones. To paraphrase one Tweeter on the issue, how can Brooks get to the
    bottom of the scandal when she was at the top of it? In other words, Brooks has
    a conflict of interest. Only a media organisation entirely free of her, and therefore
    with no reason to hide any discoveries implicating her, will have any chance of
    being believed on the findings of the companyâ\x80\x99s own probe of the matter,
    and on any claims that henceforth â\x80\x93 unlike the past &ndash; News is fully
    cooperating with police and parliamentary inquiries.</p>\n\n<p>But to really set
    things right, we&rsquo;ll need more than Brooks' head on a pike. The abuse of
    media power that lies at the heart of the phone hacking scandal can be seen in
    News Corp media in other parts of the world, including Murdoch&rsquo;s Australian
    tabloids and the national broadsheet, The Australian. Indeed, part of the horror
    generated by the News of the World scandal is its exposure of how unchecked media
    power can corrupt the foundational institutions â\x80\x93 and so the very workings
    â\x80\x93 of democracy. Confessions in recent days suggest that Scotland Yard
    may have aided James Murdoch&rsquo;s desire to &ldquo;box&rdquo; &ndash; or contain
    &ndash; the damage by deciding not to further investigate the scandal, perhaps
    because of fear of exposing corrupt cops or wearing the excoriating heat of unfavourable
    News Corp editorials. British politicians are now confessing they have been similarly
    cowed, &ldquo;None of the leading politicians wanted to touch [the scandal] because
    of the power of Murdoch and the fear that they had,&rdquo; said one MP.</p>\n\n<p>The
    inordinate power of the Murdoch press, and fear of landing on the wrong side of
    it, has a decisive influence on the Australian political landscape, too. I am
    personally aware of a successful opposition campaign to win state government focused
    almost exclusively on promulgating policies the Murdoch tabloid was seen to support.
    As The Age argued yesterday, News Ltd&rsquo;s Australian papers have &ldquo;largely
    abandoned&rdquo; valuing or attempts to achieve &ldquo;journalistic impartiality&rdquo;,
    embarking instead on a &ldquo;series of vendettas against its designated foes&rdquo;.
    Such enemies included Victoria&rsquo;s former police commissioner, Simon Overland,
    after he suggested the paper had irresponsibly published details of anti-terror
    raids before they occurred.</p>\n\n<p>Now that the tide has turned in the UK,
    those silenced by fear have rounded on the News bully, crying mea culpa for having
    lacked the balls to have resisted pressure to sell the public out. UK Assistant
    Police Commissioner John Yates now says his hasty 2009 decision not to reopen
    an investigation into News International was &ldquo;a pretty crap one&rdquo; and
    that while he usually &ldquo;put the victim first&rdquo;, when it came to News
    he didnâ\x80\x99t &ldquo;follow my principle and that is my greatest regret&rdquo;.</p>\n\n<p>British
    MP Zac Goldsmith is also beating his breast. He charges News with &lsquo;'systemic
    abuse of almost unprecedented power\", saying the organisation &ldquo;has grown
    too powerful and has abused that power. It has systematically corrupted the police
    and, in my view, has gelded this Parliament, to our shame&rdquo;.&rsquo; Such
    personal and systemic failures, the Prime Minister David Cameron admits, has shaken
    the trust of British citizens in the foundational institutions of their democracy.
    &ldquo;For people watching this scandal unfold, there is something very disturbing
    about what they see,&rdquo; said Cameron. &ldquo;Just think of who they put their
    trust in: the police to protect them, the politicians to represent them and the
    press to inform them. And all of them have been let down.&rdquo;</p>\n\n<p>Such
    admissions of failure and public self-flagellation are necessary, but they will
    not be sufficient to ensure British democracy recovers from the News of the World
    scandal. To emerge stronger, British leaders must restore the integrity of democratic
    institutions and the trust of citizens in them. Achieving this will be the work
    of numerous British Parliamentary enquiries that, as part of their brief, will
    need to seriously consider additional regulation of the power of the press. If
    our Australian leaders are smart â\x80\x93 and thatâ\x80\x99s a rhetorical phrasing,
    you donâ\x80\x99t need you to answer it â\x80\x93 theyâ\x80\x99d jump at the chance
    to implement a similar inquiry into abuses of media power here.</p>\n\n<p>This
    seems particularly true in light of evidence â\x80\x93 offered this weekend by
    Fairfax wanker â\x80\x93 Rupert Murdochâ\x80\x99s term &ndash; and former Herald
    Sun editor Bruce Guthrie. Guthrie claims there are no ethical framework guiding
    the way News produces its content because Rupert Murdoch is hostile to it. Respected
    media commentator Margaret Simons agrees, extending this observation beyond News
    Ltd newsrooms. Even where such codes exist, says Simons, they are rarely attended
    to and impossible to enforce. &ldquo;Those of us who have worked in media organisations
    know that it is rare for ethical codes to be referred to or taken seriously, if
    they stand in the way of getting the story. It is also almost impossible, particularly
    in this country, to enforce the codes.&rdquo;</p>\n\n<p>Any inquiry into media
    regulation is risky, I acknowledge this. It risks the power of the media being
    curtailed not to defend the private rights of citizens or the public interest,
    but to stop journalists shining light into the dark corners that politicians â\x80\x93
    those who do the regulating â\x80\x93 would prefer remained ill-lit. But to say
    that appropriate and balanced regulation would be impossible to achieve, or more
    outlandishly that the media &ndash; unlike all other power-centres in a democracy
    &ndash; needs no checks or balances on its influence, is self-interested rubbish.</p>\n\n<p>We
    stand at a unique point in history, where what once seemed impossible â\x80\x93
    the placing of checks on media practices that abuse power and corrupt our democratic
    institutions &ndash; now does not. British leaders in law enforcement and parliament
    have been forced into action by the News of the World scandal. Australian leaders
    should not wait until our own citizens find themselves victims of similar media
    abuses of power before they launch similar action.</p>\n\n<p>This piece was <a
    href=\"http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-14118864\">quoted</a> on the BBC News website.</p>\n"
  created_on: 2011-07-17 11:20:13
  excerpt: ''
  excerpt_markup: ''
  id: '970'
  link: ' '
  page_id: '596'
  publish_on: 2011-07-17
  site_id: '15'
  slug: news-without-ethics-media-the-murdoch-way
  title: 'News without Ethics: Media the Murdoch Way'
  updated_on: 2011-11-20 20:20:18
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2011-07-17
tags: ~
title: 'News without Ethics: Media the Murdoch Way'
--- "Fish rot from the head down. So do unethical businesses and corrupt societies.
  This is as true when the fish is an unethical business as one of the arm of liberal
  democratic government â\x80\x93 executive, judicial or legislative. It is also true
  of the fourth estate or free press, the often forgotten power-centre that is the
  key to a functioning democracy.\r\n\r\nRevelations that Rupert Murdochâ\x80\x99s
  tabloid The News of the World was bribing police and listening to, and ever interfering
  with, the phone messages of average British citizens struck by tragedy â\x80\x93
  including the parents of murdered schoolgirls and relatives of those killed in the
  London underground bombings - has sparked a revolt by UK citizens and consumers
  of News media around the world.\r\n\r\nAfter nearly six years of senior News executives
  claiming that the scandal was contained to the tabloid and a few rogue hirelings,
  the paper has been shut down from this week. Around 160 jobs have been lost, though
  Rebekah Brooks, chief executive of News International and editor of the News of
  the World when phones were being hacked, has managed to keep her post and boss Rupert
  Murdoch's favour.\r\n\r\nNot surprisingly, the decision to close the paper has barely
  muted the bays for blood, especially in light of new reports this morning showing
  a more than ten-year assault on the privacy of Gordon Brown by News International
  & others agencies, including invasion of the former PM's legal, tax, bank, phone
  and even his child's medical records. Those in the know have seen the shut-down
  as a bid to protect The Precious, rather than proof that News has finally decided
  to accept responsibility for what's gone wrong. The Precious is Murdoch's ambition
  to assume full control of the highly profitable pay-TV operator BSkyB. The take-over
  was once-considered a fait accompli but is now at risk over concerns that News Corp
  directors â\x80\x93 including James Murdoch who has been accused of misleading parliament
  about the scandal and authorizing payoffs to silence victims â\x80\x93 may not be
  \"fit and proper\" people to hold the broadcasting licence. While the communications
  regulator Ofcom had already been expressing doubts, the government has now referred
  the entire matter to the Competition Commission.  \r\n\r\nNone of this has escaped
  the public or the non-News International press, which have largely focused on Murdoch's
  refusal to sack Rebekah Brooks as evidence that News remains clueless about how
  to begin healing the suppurating ethical sores on the body of its media business.
  The claim is that unless Brooks goes, we can never be confident of knowing the full
  extent of News hacking crimes and misdemeanours. Nor can we be confident that those
  who run the business truly \"get\" why their behaviour was so wrong, and why the
  public deserve meaningful guarantees it will never happen again.\r\n\r\nI agree
  that Brooks deserves to lose her job, and must do so if the company is ever to put
  the scandal behind it. Because while the News International Chief Executive has
  said that it is \"inconceivable that [she] knew or worse, sanctioned these appalling
  allegations,\" what is truly inconceivable is that she could be â\x80\x93 or be
  seen to be â\x80\x93 an appropriate person to sit on top of internal investigations
  and cooperate with external ones. To paraphrase one Tweeter on the issue, how can
  Brooks get to the bottom of the scandal when she was at the top of it? In other
  words, Brooks has a conflict of interest. Only a media organisation entirely free
  of her, and therefore with no reason to hide any discoveries implicating her, will
  have any chance of being believed on the findings of the companyâ\x80\x99s own probe
  of the matter, and on any claims that henceforth â\x80\x93 unlike the past - News
  is fully cooperating with police and parliamentary inquiries. \r\n\r\nBut to really
  set things right, we'll need more than Brooks' head on a pike. The abuse of media
  power that lies at the heart of the phone hacking scandal can be seen in News Corp
  media in other parts of the world, including Murdoch's Australian tabloids and the
  national broadsheet, The Australian. Indeed, part of the horror generated by the
  News of the World scandal is its exposure of how unchecked media power can corrupt
  the foundational institutions â\x80\x93 and so the very workings â\x80\x93 of democracy.
  Confessions in recent days suggest that Scotland Yard may have aided James Murdoch's
  desire to \"box\" - or contain - the damage by deciding not to further investigate
  the scandal, perhaps because of fear of exposing corrupt cops or wearing the excoriating
  heat of unfavourable News Corp editorials. British politicians are now confessing
  they have been similarly cowed, \"None of the leading politicians wanted to touch
  [the scandal] because of the power of Murdoch and the fear that they had,\" said
  one MP.\r\n\r\nThe inordinate power of the Murdoch press, and fear of landing on
  the wrong side of it, has a decisive influence on the Australian political landscape,
  too. I am personally aware of a successful opposition campaign to win state government
  focused almost exclusively on promulgating policies the Murdoch tabloid was seen
  to support. As The Age argued yesterday, News Ltd's Australian papers have \"largely
  abandoned\" valuing or attempts to achieve \"journalistic impartiality\", embarking
  instead on a \"series of vendettas against its designated foes\". Such enemies included
  Victoria's former police commissioner, Simon Overland, after he suggested the paper
  had irresponsibly published details of anti-terror raids before they occurred.\r\n\r\nNow
  that the tide has turned in the UK, those silenced by fear have rounded on the News
  bully, crying mea culpa for having lacked the balls to have resisted pressure to
  sell the public out. UK Assistant Police Commissioner John Yates now says his hasty
  2009 decision not to reopen an investigation into News International was \"a pretty
  crap one\" and that while he usually \"put the victim first\", when it came to News
  he didnâ\x80\x99t \"follow my principle and that is my greatest regret\".\r\n\r\nBritish
  MP Zac Goldsmith is also beating his breast. He charges News with ''systemic abuse
  of almost unprecedented power\", saying the organisation \"has grown too powerful
  and has abused that power. It has systematically corrupted the police and, in my
  view, has gelded this Parliament, to our shame\".' Such personal and systemic failures,
  the Prime Minister David Cameron admits, has shaken the trust of British citizens
  in the foundational institutions of their democracy. \"For people watching this
  scandal unfold, there is something very disturbing about what they see,\" said Cameron.
  \"Just think of who they put their trust in: the police to protect them, the politicians
  to represent them and the press to inform them. And all of them have been let down.\"\r\n\r\nSuch
  admissions of failure and public self-flagellation are necessary, but they will
  not be sufficient to ensure British democracy recovers from the News of the World
  scandal. To emerge stronger, British leaders must restore the integrity of democratic
  institutions and the trust of citizens in them. Achieving this will be the work
  of numerous British Parliamentary enquiries that, as part of their brief, will need
  to seriously consider additional regulation of the power of the press. If our Australian
  leaders are smart â\x80\x93 and thatâ\x80\x99s a rhetorical phrasing, you donâ\x80\x99t
  need you to answer it â\x80\x93 theyâ\x80\x99d jump at the chance to implement a
  similar inquiry into abuses of media power here.\r\n\r\nThis seems particularly
  true in light of evidence â\x80\x93 offered this weekend by Fairfax wanker â\x80\x93
  Rupert Murdochâ\x80\x99s term - and former Herald Sun editor Bruce Guthrie. Guthrie
  claims there are no ethical framework guiding the way News produces its content
  because Rupert Murdoch is hostile to it. Respected media commentator Margaret Simons
  agrees, extending this observation beyond News Ltd newsrooms. Even where such codes
  exist, says Simons, they are rarely attended to and impossible to enforce. \"Those
  of us who have worked in media organisations know that it is rare for ethical codes
  to be referred to or taken seriously, if they stand in the way of getting the story.
  It is also almost impossible, particularly in this country, to enforce the codes.\"\r\n\r\nAny
  inquiry into media regulation is risky, I acknowledge this. It risks the power of
  the media being curtailed not to defend the private rights of citizens or the public
  interest, but to stop journalists shining light into the dark corners that politicians
  â\x80\x93 those who do the regulating â\x80\x93 would prefer remained ill-lit. But
  to say that appropriate and balanced regulation would be impossible to achieve,
  or more outlandishly that the media - unlike all other power-centres in a democracy
  - needs no checks or balances on its influence, is self-interested rubbish.\r\n\r\nWe
  stand at a unique point in history, where what once seemed impossible â\x80\x93
  the placing of checks on media practices that abuse power and corrupt our democratic
  institutions - now does not. British leaders in law enforcement and parliament have
  been forced into action by the News of the World scandal. Australian leaders should
  not wait until our own citizens find themselves victims of similar media abuses
  of power before they launch similar action.\r\n\r\nThis piece was [quoted](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-14118864)
  on the BBC News website. "
