---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2011-02-13
title: Religiously Defending the Right to Remain Secular
---
This column is about lawlessness, and what your government is doing in
your name. Or, more accurately, how it’s spending your money while
dodging the oversight of Parliament in direct contravention of the law.

It is about the High Court challenge to the National School Chaplaincy
Program and the reason why - whatever you think of school chaplains,
love or hate ’em - you should be hoping the challenge succeeds. Any
Australian who cares about the primacy of the law over the electoral
fortunes of the political party in power should.

On the surface, Ron Williams v Commonwealth of Australia is about
Williams, a father of six who wants his children to attend a secular
school. By secular he means a school that is neutral when it comes to
religion - a school that teaches kids about religions but doesn’t
promote belief over non-belief or the belief system of one faith over
another.

So Williams sent his brood to the local state school, assuming it would
fit the bill. It didn’t. Instead, his children were asked for gold coins
to take for Scripture Union on crazy hair day or made to attend
assemblies where the chaplain presided and a rap song was played
extolling the virtues of chaplains over teachers as adults kids could
trust.

Williams’s desire is simple - to pull the plug on the program that,
through “chaplaincy service providers” such as Scripture Union
(“Christ’s ambassadors on the front line of ministry”) and Access
Ministries (“transform[ing] this nation for God”), is feverishly trying
to spend the $437 million of Commonwealth funds to put a chaplain in all
the nation’s schools.

But like all cases heard by the High Court, this one is primarily about
legal principles of governance. Such as whether our government is
allocating our money in a fair, honest and transparent way, and in
accordance with the constitution.

Williams says it isn’t. He asserts that the Howard, Rudd and Gillard
governments have waved aside proper procedure to deliver wads of cash to
a persistent and feared constituency. Legislate for school chaplains?
Why risk parliamentary scrutiny and possible rejection? Instead, we’ll
just slide the money into the yearly Appropriations Act under some
innocuous item in the education budget.

Absolute power’s nice when you can get it but we live in a society
governed by laws. The kind of place where a little guy such as Williams
- with the help of generous advocates and micro-donations from
well-wishers - can have his day in court to say “no way”.

No way should buckets of taxpayer money be doled out without Parliament
having a say about the matter. No way should allocations be made in ways
that violate the constitution - in particular, the bit that says the
government can’t insist an Australian be a person of faith, or belong to
a particular faith, to get a job. This is something that the
government’s own guidelines and practices make clear is necessary for
chaplains.

The laws Williams is fighting to have enforced - government by and for
the people, the religious neutrality of the state - go to the heart of
what I love about this country. Let’s hope for all our sakes he wins.