---
assets: ~
categories: writings
link: ''
published: 2011-03-23 12:12:16
title: Fighting for Virile Values - This is Tony Abbott
---
Tony Abbott is said to be likeable. I believe it, though I’ve only met
him once. Introduced by a *Crikey!* journalist in Parliament House
Canberra, where I had gone to advocate against Abbott’s continued
ministerial control over the fertility control drug RU486, the Health
Minister refused to shake my hand.

It was an honest move from an un-stage-managed man, and I didn’t have a
problem with it. He didn’t like me and he let it show. It was as
straight and simple as that.

The Opposition leader’s recent attacks on the Prime Minister’s character
are designed to highlight this virtue. By accusing Kevin Rudd of
waffle-speak, standing for nothing and “gutless[ing] out,” Abbott
invites us to brand him in contrasting terms: as a straight-talking
leader with strong views and values, and a willingness to defend them.

All fine and good, though it does beg the question-what does Abbott
believe in? As Prime Minister, what policies would we expect him to
design, and to fight to implement?

Abbott’s background, employment history and associations offer some
clues. Born in 1957, he was schooled at (Jesuit) St Ignatius College
before studying for the Priesthood. He subsequently worked as a
journalist and political press secretary before leading the successful
campaign against an Australian republic. He is associated with groups
that favour censorship but are opposed to legal abortion, dying with
dignity, stem-cell research and gay rights. These include the National
Civic Council, the Lyons Forum, the Endeavour Forum and the Australian
Christian Lobby.

Abbott recently described Aboriginal welcome to country ceremonies as a
“genuflection to political correctness” and “out-of-place tokenism.”
However, he believes Federal Parliament should continue to start the day
with the Lord’s Prayer.

Abbott believes the “argument [on climate change] is absolute crap”. So
far, he has rejected all proven and economically orthodox means of
pricing carbon.

Abbott told *60 Minutes* in what he later described as a “spontaneous
answer” that homosexuality makes him feel “a bit threatened.”

Health Minister Abbott’s statements and policies on abortion renewed
national debate about the issue. He described “the fact that 100,000
[Australian] women choose to end their pregnancies” as a “national
tragedy” that left a “legacy of unutterable shame.” He said there was “a
bizarre double standard…where someone who kills a pregnant woman’s baby
is guilty of murder but a woman who aborts an unborn baby is simply
exercising choice.” The figure of 100,000 turned out to be wrong.

Abbott voted against legislation allowing Australian scientists to do
research using embryonic stem cells.

Abbott wants to return to at fault-divorce, supporting legislation that
would require spouses to prove offences like adultery, habitual
drunkenness or cruelty before they can separate.

At the launch of a collection of B.A. Santamaria’s letters, Abbott
lauded his mentor for the view that “it [is] impossible to be a passive
Christian.” Abbott argued that the Howard government’s decisions to
“overturn the Northern Territory’s euthanasia law, ban gay marriage,
stop the ACT heroin trial, provide additional financial support for
one-income families, and try to reduce abortion numbers through
pregnancy support counseling” showed that the “eight Catholics…in
the…Cabinet” had turned the “tide of secular humanism.”

Despite this, he recently implied on ABC’s *Q&A* that public and media
interest in his Catholic beliefs was unfair.

This is who Tony Abbott is and what he believes. It’s up to us to decide
whether we want this sort of man, fighting for this sort of Australia,
to be the next PM.