---
assets: ~
excerpt: ''
published: 2011-03-23 12:12:14
tags: ~
title: A Welcome Shift to the Political Middle Ground
---
Something is happening to conservative political parties in Australia
and overseas. Left-of-centre parties have gained power in the UK, US and
Australia by advocating agendas far more centre than they are left. This
has left the conservative side of politics floundering, unsure if they
should stay the course or contest the middle ground by bringing their
policies into line with voters who want greater regulation of the market
and less government intrusion into their personal affairs. In Australia,
centrist Labor governments are in government Federally and in every
state except Western Australia. However, this may change with moderate
Opposition leaders in both NSW and Victoria seen to have a chance next
time voters go to the polls.

Labor governments have been quick to claim that moderate oppositions
stand for nothing. The pine for the days when Margaret Thatcher claimed
there was no such thing as society; former Howard Government Minister
Tony Abbott could barely let a month pass before without talking about
abortion and when the Bush administration pushed the painful end of life
decisions surrounding brain-dead bulimia-victim Terri Schiavo to the
centre of the national agenda. The days when the extreme rhetoric and
policy of conservative policies could be counted on to alienate the
majority and drive them into centrist Labor’s arms.

But the average Australian has no cause for grief. Instead, the rise of
moderation on the conservative side of politics is cause for celebration
and relief. Because when right-of-centre parties moderate, they drive
political no-brainer issues to the margins. Issues like whether women
should have a right to choose abortion, or terminally ill people the
right to die-rights that 80 per cent of the Australian public support.
This leaves our pollies to duke it out on urgent policy matters that are
the business of government, like the sustainability of current
approaches to public health, public education, essential service
provision and the environment.

Will the moderation of conservatives make politics boring or value-free?
Not at all. However thrilling the men in John Howard’s cabinet found
their constant assault on women faced with unplanned pregnancies, the
targets experienced them as bewildering and just plain hurtful. I well
recall the waitress who put her hand on my arm as I paid for my coffee.
She had seen me on TV arguing for a removal of the ministerial veto over
RU486. “You know that bloke?” she whispered. “The one with the big ears
who is always saying stuff about abortion? I hate him.” There were tears
in her eyes. “I just *hate* him.”

The claim that moderation will make right-of-centre politics value-free
is rubbish, too. Policies that protect individual privacy, and privilege
the public good over narrow sectarian interests, are as ethical as they
come.

But the moderation of conservative parties is a work in progress, not a
done deal. Those seeking to scuttle aren’t just found on the left, but
the once-ascendant far right. Commented Margaret Thatcher’s press
secretary about the centrist leader, David Cameron, “I wonder whether
David Cameron is a conservative.” In Australia, Tony Abbott is penning a
manifesto on conservative politics that is part of his quest for
leadership of the Liberals.

All this may be worth considering the next time you hear someone say
that a centrist Liberal or National party leader “stands for nothing.”
What most Australians value-and see as the real business of
government-is found at the political centre.

The moderation of political conservatives will benefit us all.