---
assets: ~
excerpt: Years after this piece was published, Harvard has [joined my call](http://bit.ly/I4SSHe)
  for academics to reclaim their scholarship.
published: 2012-04-25
tags: ~
title: To Publish - or to e-publish?
---
Once upon of time there was a tribe called the Very Smarts. The Very
Smarts lived on a island where they planted, tended and then harvested
trees from which they carved beautiful and much-sought after canoes. But
while the Very Smarts were wonderful craftspeople, they had neither the
interest nor the acumen to distribute or profit from their work.
Instead, completed canoes were rowed by the Very Smarts to the
Teleporting tribe on the mainland. There the Teleporters would put the
final touches on the canoe and, with the Very Smarts help, rate each
canoe for quality.

On the teleport home, the Very Smarts took care not to lose the
parchment on which evidence of the rating was stamped. A high rating
earned the boat builder status and power in the tribe, not to mention
the tastiest morsels and best digs, while a low rating meant disgrace
and despair. Once the Very Smarts were gone, the Teleporters got busy.
The canoes were sold to highest bidder for a handsome profit, and then
teleported to their new owners.

And so it went, for as long as anyone could remember, until one day the
Very Smarts discovered that they could teleport, too. And though it took
awhile, some Very Smarts began wondering why they ought to allow the
Teleporters to sell and distribute their highly prized canoes, now that
they could do it themselves. But others Very Smarts were less sure. If
the Teleporters didn’t rate their work, how would they know how to
distribute social and material resources amongst the tribe?

If you’ve been following the feisty debates on-line, in the press and in
the scholarly literature about the impact of the internet on publishing,
you’ll have no trouble recognising the Teleporters as the publishers of
scholarly journals and the dilemma facing the Very Smarts as the same
one confronting contemporary academics in an electronic age. To solve
it, we need to look past the enthusiastic shouting of those championing
an open access future, and rapid-fire press releases from publishing
houses eager to assure us they’ve finally cracked a viable business
model for the new age, and return to first principles. Ignoring how
we’ve always done it and why, we need to ask the question: what is it
that academics need from, and are trying to achieve with, scholarly
publishing?

The answer is relatively simple. Academics need timely and convenient
access to the most up-to-date scholarship in their discipline and their
discipline’s archives. They also want their own work published quickly
and disseminated widely, and to be credited for their labour in ways
that enable them to maintain their job, or even climb the ladder.

The truth, though publishers don’t like to hear it, is that academics
and universities hold most of the cards in the scholarly publishing
game. This is not just because they do the research, write the papers
and do the unpaid work required to provide quality assurance by
reviewing the work of their peers. It is also because their primary
objective is not to profit from the distribution of their work (like the
Very Smarts, most currently earn little to nothing from the hard-copy
and electronic distribution of their oeuvres), but to have it read and
cited by others.

In the new electronic age it is hard to see why the achievement of these
goals requires the input of a professional publisher at all. Sure,
publishers currently edit academic papers prior to publication which, in
some instances, can be intensive and painstaking work. But while it has
not been exploited much to date, the expertise to perform this task too
also exists within the academic tribe, as clearly demonstrated by
in-house university journals like Monash’s People and Place.

In fact, the only power the electronic shake-out of scholarly
communication has left to traditional publishers is that of quality
control. In academia, publication in journals like Nature and Mind still
open doors for those seeking grants or promotion. This is the Very
Smarts problem: without the stamped parchment from the Teleporters, how
will they compete for rewards?

But the truth is that new technologies are already showing the way.
Instead of relying on the publisher’s reputation as a quality indicator,
scholars could rely on electronic citation counts: an indicator which is
not currently but can be made blind to whether the site of first
publication was an established journal, an institutional repository, or
the author’s own website. As well, Google’s PageRank algorithm is just
one of a number of automated methods that systematically aggregate the
opinions of unknown individuals that shows promise as an indicator of
quality.

A return to first principles about what scholarly publication is all
about, and what academics need from it, leads to the conclusion that in
the new world of electronic communication the Very Smarts don’t need the
Teleporters any more. What they need are new ways of harnessing in-house
talents to access, disseminate and receive rewards for reporting on
quality research results.

*In 2012, seven years after this piece was published, Harvard has [joined my call](http://bit.ly/I4SSHe) for academics to reclaim their scholarship.*